Search parameters: 
Keywords: Telepsychology, Telemental Health
Database: PsycNet
Included articles published from 2017 to Present/2021 (5 year interval) in an APA Journal

{"1":"Veterans face a variety of stressors related to their military service (Institute of Medicine, 2014; Tanielian et al., 2008). Most veterans who return from military conflict do not have a mental health condition, but all veterans “experience a period of readjustment as they reintegrate into life with family, friends, and community” (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration [SAMHSA], 2012, p. 1; Tanielian et al., 2008). Those individuals must juggle a variety of sometimes conflicting family and military-related responsibilities, learn to readjust to environments where behaviors associated with a constant state of readiness are no longer needed, and process combat-related exposure that may collectively contribute to problems for both veterans and their families (Institute of Medicine, 2014; SAMHSA, 2012).
Veterans who are exposed to combat are more likely to report normal reactions to stress including depression, hopelessness, insomnia, nightmares, feelings of rejection, aggressive behavior, and substance misuse (SAMHSA, 2012). They also report higher levels of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depression, generalized anxiety, intermittent explosive disorder, and substance misuse after returning from conflict (Lazar, 2014; SAMHSA, 2012; Tanielian et al., 2008). Veterans with PTSD and major depression are also frequently diagnosed with other comorbid mental health-related diagnoses, experience elevated death rates from suicide and homicide, report more work-related problems such as unemployment, and are more likely to be homeless than the average person (Lazar, 2014).
Many veterans are not receiving adequate mental health treatment for these conditions (Lazar, 2014; Tanielian et al., 2008). Lazar (2014) surveyed veterans who returned from conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan and found that only 23%–40% with a diagnosable mental health condition reported receiving help from a provider in the previous year. Although the percentages of those who meet criteria for a diagnosis and subsequently seek treatment vary (23%–40% in the Lazar study vs. 53% in the Tanielian study), it is clear that many veterans who are returning from conflict are not receiving adequate treatment for their mental health-related problems. Collectively, the Lazar (2014) and the Tanielian et al. (2008) studies suggest that the problem is potentially related to veterans either not choosing to seek services or a shortage of providers located near the veteran.
A number of barriers that prevent veterans who are in distress from seeking mental health services have been presented in the literature (United States Government Accountability Office [USGAO], 2011; Tanielian et al., 2008). Those barriers include the following: (a) lack of access to mental health services (e.g., lack of transportation to a provider, the distance that veterans must travel to obtain services is too far, etc.), (b) negative stigma associated with utilizing mental health services (e.g., concerns about how other individuals will view them if they found out about the veteran seeking treatment), (c) lack of awareness of mental health conditions or treatments such as whether their symptoms rise to the level of a diagnosis or believe that no treatments are available to address their symptoms, and (d) concerns about whether the veteran would qualify for services through the Veterans Health Administration ([VHA]; Tanielian et al., 2008; USGAO, 2011). Given the consequences of these barriers (e.g., they serve to prevent veterans from seeking or obtaining treatment), more work needs to be done to reduce their impact on veterans.
Telepsychology, or the use of technology to provide mental health services (American Psychological Association, 2013), broadly encompasses a variety of direct formats including videoconferencing, phone, and instant messaging as well as a variety of indirect formats such as email, self-help apps, or websites (Luxton, Nelson, et al., 2016). In this article, telepsychology is more narrowly defined as the use of videoconferencing and telephone technologies to provide mental health services in order to reflect that the bulk of the available research is conducted using one of these two mediums. There are also a number of terms presented in the literature that are interchangeable with the term telepsychology such as telehealth, telemental health, telebehavioral health, teletherapy, telepsychotherapy, etc. (Luxton, Nelson, et al., 2016).
Telepsychology is often viewed as a potential solution for increasing access to treatment, increasing privacy, and reducing exposure to the negative stigma associated with seeking treatment for veterans (Chen et al., 2019 [videoconferencing]; Turgoose et al., 2018 [videoconferencing and phone]). For example, telepsychology can allow veterans to use an internet-connected device, such as a computer, in the comfort of their own home or in a local office setting to meet with their provider who may be located across the country by videoconference or phone. Participating in telepsychology increases privacy associated with seeking mental health services by eliminating the need to sit in a lobby with other veterans while waiting for a mental health provider appointment. Furthermore, this increased privacy associated with telepsychology visits can help prevent some of the negative stigma or embarrassment that veterans might experience during face-to-face (FTF) visits by allowing them to avoid those in-office contacts.
Effectiveness of Telepsychology
One question that must be presented to mental health providers and researchers is whether veteran-focused telepsychology is at least as effective as treatment that is delivered FTF (Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015 [videoconferencing]; Turgoose et al., 2018 [videoconferencing and phone]). A growing number of studies have examined this question with some studies finding that telepsychology is effective and equivalent to services delivered FTF, whereas other studies have found mixed results (Turgoose et al., 2018 [videoconferencing and phone]). Telepsychology has generally been found to be an effective treatment delivery method for common mental health conditions experienced by veterans (Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015 [videoconferencing]; Turgoose et al., 2018 [videoconferencing and phone]) including the following: PTSD and other trauma and stressor-related disorders (Wierwille et al., 2016 [videoconferencing]), anxiety (Burke et al., 2019 [internet-delivered]; Yuen et al., 2013 [videoconferencing]), depression (Sztein et al., 2018 [internet-only]), intermittent explosive disorder (Osma et al., 2016 [videoconferencing]), substance use disorders (Wilks et al., 2017 [internet-only]), etc.
For example, Wierwille et al. (2016) reported clinically significant reductions in trauma-related symptom in a sample of 221 veterans with PTSD after videoconferencing-delivered exposure therapy at posttest. In another study by Luxton, Pruitt, et al. (2016), 121 military service members and veterans were randomly assigned to receive 8 sessions of behavioral activation therapy for depression either through home-based videoconferencing or FTF visits. At posttest, both the home-based telepsychology and FTF participants demonstrated strong reductions in symptoms of depression and hopelessness, with the home-based group demonstrating a slight overall benefit. Veterans reported statistically significant, high satisfaction ratings suggesting that they were satisfied with treatment, regardless of whether the services were provided through home-based videoconferencing or FTF (Luxton, Nelson, et al., 2016).
As the volume of telepsychology research has grown, review studies have been better able to answer the question of whether telepsychology is as effective as FTF services by examining findings from groups of studies that looked broadly at civilian samples (see Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015 [videoconferencing]; Sztein et al., 2018 [internet-only]; Turgoose et al., 2018 [videoconferencing and phone]). For example, Sztein et al. (2018) conducted a civilian-focused systematic review and meta-analysis with 14 studies that examined treatment outcomes for telepsychology-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy for depression. The authors reported a medium effect (d = 0.74; p < .001) at posttest with sustained reductions in symptoms of depression at 3- and 6-month follow-up in adults, which the authors noted were comparable to effect sizes commonly observed in FTF samples (Sztein et al., 2018 [internet-only]). Barak et al.’s (2008) was another civilian-focused meta-analytic study that broadly looked at mental health services provided through telepsychology. The authors reviewed 64 articles that included 9,764 total participants and reported a mean overall medium weighted effect size of d = 0.53 for services delivered through web-based interventions, which the authors noted is also comparable to effect sizes observed in FTF-delivered talk therapies (Barak et al., 2008). Bolton and Dorstyn (2015) looked specifically at the impact of videoconferencing-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy on the symptoms of depression, generalized anxiety, and PTSD in another civilian-focused systematic review. The authors reported significant medium to strong improvements (d range = 0.66–3.22) in symptoms across all conditions in both telepsychology and FTF conditions, but was unable to determine whether telepsychology and FTF-delivered treatments were equivalent (Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015).
Our research only noted one review study that focused specifically on veterans. Turgoose et al. (2018) conducted a systematic review that included 41 studies that focused on the use of telepsychology (i.e., videoconferencing and phone) to treat veterans with PTSD. The authors noted that a majority of the studies reviewed found that PTSD treatment delivered by telepsychology was just as effective as PTSD treatments delivered FTF. The authors also noted that veterans participating in telepsychology reported high levels of acceptability and treatment satisfaction overall with services delivered through technology, with some studies suggesting that veterans were less comfortable with services delivered through technology. The authors also noted similar dropout rates for telepsychology and FTF treatments (Turgoose et al., 2018). One limitation of the systematic review, however, is that it is descriptive in nature and looks for trends in the studies reviewed, so it does not allow the author to answer statistical questions such as whether or not services delivered through technology are effective or equivalent to services delivered FTF.
The Present Study
Research on the effectiveness of telepsychology is growing, and both the quantity and quality of veteran-specific studies are expanding (Turgoose et al., 2018). A number of veteran-focused review studies are noted in the literature and those studies have generally found telepsychology to be as effective as services delivered FTF (see Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015; Sztein et al., 2018). Given the unique lived experiences of veterans and the increasing reliance on services delivered via telepsychology, more research is needed to determine whether telepsychology is as effective as services delivered FTF. The Turgoose et al. (2018) systematic review, which focused on PTSD, suggests that services delivered through telepsychology are as effective as services delivered FTF. A new review study, however, is needed to statistically evaluate the effectiveness of services provided by telepsychology for veterans. The present study seeks to add to the literature on the efficacy of telepsychology with veterans by using meta-analytic techniques to test whether telepsychology-based services are effective and whether they are equivalent to services delivered FTF. Furthermore, as technological methods of delivering therapy have evolved, the present study also seeks to examine the differences in the effectiveness of therapy delivered by videoconferencing versus phone.
Method

Research Question
The overall research question for this meta-analysis is “Is telepsychology effective for veteran populations?” There are three approaches to answering this question. First, is telepsychology effective across time when comparing pretest assessments to posttest and follow-up assessments? Second, is telepsychology effective compared to treatments as usual (TAU)? Furthermore, are there any differences between the two primary modalities of telepsychology, videoconferencing and phone?
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Initially, we broadly defined telepsychology as including mental health services delivered using technology. After reviewing the available literature, we elected to limit the telepsychology modality considered for inclusion in this study to synchronous videoconferencing and telephone. The literature on areas such as instant messaging, email, web apps, etc. with our focus population was too sparse and did not allow for a robust enough sample to be considered for inclusion.
We defined veterans as former service members at the time the study was completed. We included studies that contained veterans and that met our other search criteria. Other inclusion criteria included empirical studies that reported findings of a therapeutic intervention delivered by videoconference or telephone. The intervention had to focus on delivering therapy to treat a psychological condition, as opposed to other purposes like screening, testing, assessing, or monitoring. The intervention also had to have a therapeutic component (e.g., reducing symptoms of depression) as opposed to being solely educational in nature. The most common conditions assessed in these studies were PTSD, depression, anger, and anxiety, although therapy for pain, quality of life, relationship satisfaction, sleep quality, hopelessness, overall mental health, psychological functioning, and smoking cessation were also present. Finally, the study had to report clinical outcomes of a psychological nature that included both a pretest and posttest data collection period. We excluded outcomes concerning feasibility, perceptions, satisfaction, and costs.
Literature Search
The research team initially looked for meta-analytic, systematic, and literature review studies for veteran samples to determine the types of review studies that had previously been completed. Then, we searched the reference lists of those articles for empirical studies that met our inclusion criteria. After we exhausted all review studies and their reference lists, the research team conducted a broader literature search using various combinations of the following search terms in the PsycInfo, MedLine, and CINAHL databases: telepsychology, telehealth, telemental health, telebehavioral health, teletherapy, telecounseling, tele, phone, videoconferencing, therapy, counseling, psychotherapy, veterans, treatment, disorder, and mental health. We continued this process of searching databases and back-searching reference lists until we were confident all of the relevant published studies had been located.
Computing Effect Sizes
Practically, all outcome measures in this set of studies were scored such that higher values indicated worse psychological conditions and lower values indicated better psychological conditions. For example, high scores on the PTSD Checklist (PCL), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL), Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ), etc. represent higher levels of psychological distress, so therapies that lower scores on these measures have desirable effects. Typically, these situations result in negative effect sizes (i.e., the posttest scores are lower than the pretest scores). However, we have reported positive effect sizes to reflect that psychological conditions improved as a result of the therapy.
There were a few measures wherein higher values indicate better psychological conditions (e.g., QOLI, relationship quality, and satisfaction). We used positive effect sizes to indicate improvement in psychological conditions for these measures.
Although some very good work has been done in developing appropriate metrics for meta-analyses, the data presented in the studies we reviewed do not permit that good work to be fully capitalized upon. Nearly all of the studies that were located reported pre–post comparisons, and the effect size for pre–post comparisons is the mean change score divided by the standard deviation of the change scores. Only one article reported these data (Fortney et al., 2015).
More commonly, the articles reported the mean pre and postscores for the treatment group (and often a comparison group), and they reported the standard deviation for the pretest scores and the standard deviation for the posttest scores. Note that the standard deviation of the change scores is not simply the difference between the standard deviations of the pretest and posttest scores, nor is it the average of the standard deviations of the pretest and posttest scores.
Pre–Post Effect Size
Because this was the only data provided, we made use of it by computing the pre–post effect size (which can also be called the “within group effect size” or the “uncontrolled effect size”) by dividing the difference in pretest and posttest mean scores by the average standard deviation of the pretest and posttest scores.
Randomized Clinical Trials Effect Size
Some studies used a true randomized clinical trial (RCT) design to allow for the testing of noninferiority or equivalence of telepsychology to the same therapy-administered FTF. In these designs, one group received therapy administered through telepsychology and a comparison group received the same therapy administered in a FTF format (the TAU group).
To compute the effect size for these research designs, we computed a pre–post effect size for both the telepsychology group and the TAU group, and then, we subtracted the TAU group pre–post effect size from the telepsychology group pre–post effect size.
Multiple Effect Sizes From Studies
Of the 27 studies, 22 of them reported results for more than one psychological outcome (e.g., Acierno et al., 2016, reported results using both the Beck Depression Inventory, which we categorized as depression, and the Patient Checklist, which we categorized as trauma). Because we analyzed the data by psychological outcome, each study could be included in the results more than once (e.g., the Acierno et al., 2016, study contributed an effect size for both trauma and depression). However, eight studies included two measures for the same psychological outcome (e.g., Aburizik et al., 2013, included both the Patient Health Questionnaire and the Beck Depression Inventory, both of which we categorized as measures of depression). In these cases, the effect sizes for the two measures of the same construct were averaged together before being included in the weighted average calculations. By doing this, we avoided the problem of double-counting these studies.
Computing Weighted Average Effect Sizes
The goal of meta-analysis is to determine the weighted average effect size for groups of studies that meet certain conditions. However, the process for computing the weighted average effect size differs slightly for the pre–post effect size compared to RCT designs.
For pre–post effect sizes, the effect size from each study was weighted by the number of participants who completed the posttest.
For the RCT designs, the effect size of each study was weighted by the inverse of the variance of the estimate. The inverse of the variance is highly dependent on the sample size, but it has better psychometric properties than simply using the sample size of each study.
Pre–Post and Follow-Up Designs
All of the studies included in this meta-analysis used at least a pre–post design such that measures of psychological states were collected twice. Many of the studies also included some sort of follow-up measurement after the posttest administration. The most common follow-up measurements were at 3 and 6 months after the posttest.
In addition to computing the effect sizes for the pre–post comparisons, we also computed effect sizes for follow-ups when the data were provided in the article. The procedure for computing the follow-up effect sizes was exactly the same as the pre–post effect size, except that instead of using the posttest mean values and standard deviations, the follow-up mean values and standard deviations were used.
Results

Descriptive Results of Literature Search
A total of 27 published studies were located that met the inclusion criteria, and they contained 27 samples (see Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Description of Studies Included in the Meta-Analysis Organized by Author and Dependent Variable Studied
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
for a summary of the 27 studies included in the analysis organized by author last name and dependent variable studied). Of these 27 studies, 25 provided pre–post data, and 18 were RCT designs. (Of the seven pre–post studies, three also included a no-treatment wait-list control group, but the wait-list data were not considered.) Of the 27 studies, 19 of them examined more than one psychological outcome measure.
Computing the number of participants in these studies was challenging. Not surprisingly, when therapy is being administered over the course of weeks and months, dropout from the studies is a problem. Sample sizes for pretest data were often greater than that for the posttest and follow-up data. Where reported, we used the sample size for the number of participants who were assessed at the posttest or follow-up measurements (see Table 1). The 30 samples used a total of 1,667 participants who received telepsychology (e.g., videoconferencing or telephone) and 981 participants who received FTF therapy in RCT designs.
Publication Bias Assessment
Publication bias is a concern in meta-analysis because it is possible that only studies that show strong effects get published. When the conclusions of meta-analytic studies are based only on the studies with strong effect sizes, the outcome of the meta-analysis is biased.
There is no definitive method for assessing publication bias, and there is also no definitive procedure for correcting for it. Of the assessments that have been developed, all have limitations (van Aert et al., 2019). However, one general assessment of publication bias is to compute the correlation between sample size and effect size. If this correlation is significant and negative, a tentative inference is that smaller studies are only published when they have stronger effects, resulting in bias in the meta-analytic conclusions.
We computed the correlations between sample size and effect size for RCT designs measuring trauma and depression at posttest. These correlations are r = −.17 and .11 for k = 13 and 12 studies, p = .58 and.73, respectively.
Similarly, we computed the correlations between sample size and effect size for all of the pre–post effect sizes for both trauma and depression. These correlations are r = −.34 and −.20 for k = 17 and 17 studies, p = .19 and .44, respectively.
Although these nonsignificant correlations do not establish that there is no bias in our results, they are an indication that publication bias is not likely to be a strong influence. For psychological conditions other than trauma and depression, and for follow-up assessment months after the posttest, there were simply not enough effect sizes to make it meaningful to compute the correlations.
Results of Meta-Analysis
Recall that we examined two different designs: pre–post and RCT. Most of the RCT designs also provided data that could be analyzed for pre–post analyses. To interpret the weighted average effect sizes, we used the guidelines suggested by Cohen (1988) wherein effect sizes in the range of 0.20, 0.50, and 0.80 are considered weak, moderate, and strong effects, respectively.
For the pre–post designs, the results for each type of psychological problem are reported in Table 2,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Summary Statistics for Various Mental Health Conditions in Meta-Analysis at Posttest, and 3- and 6-Month Following Treatment for Pre–Post Studies
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
which shows the number of studies, the total number of participants in those studies, the weighted average effect size, and whether the study involved videoconferencing or phone. These results show the effect of telepsychology over time, without regards to any comparison group. Most of the effect sizes are in the moderate-to-strong range, and given that most of them are positive numbers, this result indicates that participants’ psychological well-being improved as a result of receiving services through telepsychology.
For example, the two psychological conditions studied most frequently were trauma and depression. We used the guidelines suggested by Cohen (1988) to interpret the weighted average effect sizes. The average weighted effect sizes for trauma (d = 1.00 for videoconferencing and d = 0.51 for phone) and depression (d = 0.86 for videoconferencing and d = 0.44 for phone) across these studies fell into the moderate-to-strong range, and the positive values of the effect sizes indicate that participants’ psychological symptoms of trauma and depression improved from pretest to posttest. It is important to note that this is just improvement over time in the participants, and in this type of research design, there is no control or comparison group. Note that there is no way to compute the confidence intervals for these values because the formula for the confidence intervals depends on having the standard deviation of the difference scores, and this information has not been reported in the studies we located for this meta-analysis.
For RCT designs, the results for each type of psychological problem are reported in Table 3,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Summary Statistics for Various Mental Health Conditions in Meta-Analysis at Posttest and at 3- and 6-Month Following Treatment for Randomized Controlled Trial Studies
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
which shows the number of studies, the total number of participants in those studies, the weighted average effect size, the 95% confidence interval for the weighted average effect size, and whether the study involved videoconferencing or phone. These results show the effect of telepsychology over time when compared to an equivalent FTF therapy. Strictly speaking, these are the results of the highest scientific value. Paradoxically, values close to 0.00 are a good thing; they indicate that telepsychology was as effective as services provided FTF. Positive values indicate that telepsychology was more effective than FTF therapy, and correspondingly, negative values indicate that FTF therapy was more effective than telepsychology.
For example, consider the values for RCT studies for trauma and depression shown in Table 3. The weighted average effect sizes for trauma are d = −0.25 for videoconferencing and d = −0.34 for phone. The negative sign indicates that participants in the FTF condition improved over time more than those in the telepsychology condition. However, this is a small effect, and thus, it could be practically interpreted as telepsychology is comparably as effective as FTF treatment. Similarly, for depression, the weighted average effect sizes are d = 0.00 for videoconferencing and d = −0.09 for phone. Again, the negative sign indicates that the FTF group fared better than the telepsychology group. But, here again, the effect is very small; it is quite close to 0.00. For practical purposes, telepsychology was equivalent to FTF treatment.
Discussion

Overall, the results of this meta-analysis suggest that telepsychology is comparable to FTF therapy for veterans dealing with a variety of psychological conditions. The pre–post comparisons suggest that videoconferencing-based telepsychology has moderate-to-strong effect sizes and telephone-based telepsychology has moderate effect sizes for the two psychological conditions studied most frequently (e.g., trauma and depression).
The RCT designs allow for a more powerful conclusion to be drawn. In general, videoconferencing- and telephone-based telepsychology is practically equivalent to and FTF-delivered therapies. The effect sizes comparing telepsychology to FTF therapies are generally weak, indicating that there is little difference in the two modalities.
Implications
The present study is also unique in that it compared the two most frequently utilized modes of telepsychology, videoconferencing, and phone. It also extends the work of Turgoose et al. (2018) who described the literature on the effectiveness and equivalence of telepsychology on veterans and adds to the larger body of meta-analytic studies on the effectiveness and equivalence of telepsychology when compared to FTF treatment by applying the meta-analytic approach to veteran-related studies. Turgoose et al.’s (2018) systematic review noted that a majority of veteran-focused studies have found telepsychology to be an effective way of reducing psychological symptoms. That study also indicated that most studies have found that talk therapies delivered to veterans by telepsychology are as effective at reducing mental health symptoms as services that are delivered FTF (Turgoose et al., 2018). Our study extends Turgoose et al.’s findings by using meta-analytic techniques to quantitatively assess and subsequently support their conclusions related to the effectiveness and equivalence of telepsychology. In addition, to our knowledge, our study represents the first meta-analytic study to evaluate the effectiveness and equivalence of telepsychology at reducing mental health symptoms exclusively in veteran samples.
In our study, we found that services delivered by telepsychology had a moderate-to-strong effect of reducing symptoms of PTSD and depression in veterans. This finding is similar to the effect sizes reported by other authors who have looked more broadly at the effect sizes of telepsychology for PTSD and depression (Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015; Coughtrey & Pistrang, 2018; Olthuis et al., 2016; Osenbach et al., 2013). For example, Bolton and Dorstyn (2015) reported findings that were similar to ours. Those authors found moderate-to-strong effects (d range = 0.66–3.22) for reductions in cognitive and behavioral symptoms of PTSD, depression, and generalized anxiety in a meta-analysis that included 11 studies and 474 total participants (Bolton & Dorstyn, 2015). Olthuis et al. (2016) reported similar effects for telepsychology for PTSD, d = 0.81. Collectively, these studies suggest that telepsychology-delivered services are an effective way of reducing symptoms of PTSD and depression.
Our findings related to the equivalence of telepsychology compared to services delivered FTF with veterans was also comparable to that noted in previous research (Norwood et al., 2018; Osenbach et al., 2013). In the present study, we found services delivered via telepsychology to be equivalent to services delivered FTF (d range = −0.48 to 0.24). Norwood et al. (2018) reported a similar value of d of −0.03 when examining the noninferiority of telepsychology at reducing target mental health symptoms. And Osenbach et al. (2013) reported a d of −0.11 when comparing telepsychology to FTF treatments and a d of 0.29 when comparing telepsychology to TAU comparison groups.
Limitations
Two limitations are noted for the present study, as well as three limitations for the larger body of literature we reviewed. First, in the present study, we were able to locate a sufficient number of studies to assess the effectiveness as well as the equivalence of telepsychology versus FTF for PTSD and depression, especially at posttest for the pre–post and RCT studies (ranged from 12 to 17 studies per analysis). However, the number of studies available to us that examined other diagnostic conditions (e.g., anxiety, pain, sleep disorders, etc.) was minimal. We considered removing any analysis of those diagnostic conditions from our study; however, we elected to include them for documentation purposes to highlight what is currently known. Ideally, we would have a minimum of five studies for each diagnostic condition; we were simply unable to find enough studies for all of the conditions.
Second, in the present study, just as we were only able to find a limited number of studies for all of the diagnostic conditions, studies with longitudinal data were limited. For example, we were able to locate 13 RCT studies that provided results at posttest for PTSD; however, only 4 of those studies provided 3-month follow-up data, and only 2 of those studies provided 6-month follow-up data. This lack of longitudinal data on the effectiveness of telepsychology for each of the diagnostic conditions means that our findings reported effect sizes for 3- and 6-month follow-up that are based on limited data. Ideally, our analysis would include a minimum of five studies for each diagnostic condition at 3- and 6-month follow-up.
We also noted three limitations related to our review of the larger body of veteran-focused telepsychology literature. First, more RCTs are needed for all diagnostic conditions, especially for diagnostic conditions other than PTSD and depression. For example, we noted no RCTs that targeted substance use disorders and only one or two studies that addressed symptoms of anxiety or pain. To some extent, this makes sense because PTSD and depression are two of the most common mental health problems that veterans experience. However, veterans face a number of mental health problems that telepsychology might be helpful in addressing.
Second, very few of the veteran-focused telepsychology studies we identified provided demographic or outcome data on the race, gender, or geographic makeup of their participants. These data could be helpful in determining whether traditionally underserved veteran subpopulations, such as rural, women, and/or veterans of color populations, for example, are experiencing similar levels of efficacy compared to the average participant.
Finally, we noted few veteran-focused telepsychology studies that used samples outside of North America, and especially the United States. Are telepsychology-delivered services as effective as, and are those services equivalent to FTF-delivered treatments that are provided to veterans in other areas of the world?
Future Directions
Based on the limitations noted above, both for the present study as well as the larger body of telepsychology-focused research, we offer six suggestions for the future research. First, more studies, especially RCTs that look at diagnostic conditions other than PTSD and depression, are needed. Individual studies in the larger body of telepsychology literature (i.e., veteran and all other populations) have looked at the efficacy of telepsychology for psychological disorders ranging from substance use disorders, anxiety, and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) to more chronic forms of mental illness including bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Similar or enhanced versions of these studies should be considered for veterans. Second, future studies should include more follow-up data on research participants. In the present study, follow-up data were most commonly presented at posttest and then at 3- and 6-month posttreatment. Future studies that include this type of follow-up data would allow us to better understand the long-term efficacy of telepsychology with veterans. Third, future studies should include technology modality as a moderator variable to allow us to better understand whether specific types of telepsychology-based services (e.g., videoconferencing vs. telephone) are more effective with veterans than other modalities.
Fourth, too few veteran-focused studies related to web apps, email, computer-only, and text messaging or instant chat to consider adding them to the present study. As this body of literature expands, more work needs to be done to better understand the role of these other, less often researched modalities of telepsychology to verify whether and/or under what circumstances these other technologies can be effective methods of providing services using meta-analytic techniques. Fifth, more effort needs to be made to describe sample characteristics such as the race, gender, and geographic location of veteran research participants as well as outcome data on specific veteran subpopulations (e.g., veterans of color). Including these sample characteristics and providing outcome data on these special populations will help future researchers better assess whether the benefits of telepsychology are being experienced by all veterans. Finally, the future research should focus on studying the efficacy of veteran populations outside of North America. Generally, more work must be done to close the gap between veterans who need mental health services and those who receive these services. The present study suggests that telepsychology, especially videoconferencing, and phone whenever videoconferencing is not available, can play an important role in addressing mental health service disparities for veterans.",
"2": "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the child custody evaluation (CCE) community has been astounding and immediate. In March, April, and May of 2020, state and local governments and courts began issuing safe-at-home and social distancing proclamations. Provision of in-person mental health services was discouraged as unsafe (Chenneville & Schwartz-Mette, 2020). These pronouncements required evaluators to quickly learn what technology could be used and how to use it to finish incomplete evaluations or meet the demands of court orders for new evaluations. While the capability of providing behavioral health services with telecommunication technologies has been extended to virtually all clinical aspects of behavioral and mental health practice, such as assessment, consultation, psychoeducation, and treatment (Luxton, Nelson, & Maheu, 2016), utilizing these technologies in parenting plan evaluations had not been a serious topic prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. That has changed. This article examines the feasibility of remote child custody evaluations (RCCEs) both during the pandemic and beyond.
The COVID-19 pandemic has pushed an entire professional community to consider whether videoconferencing (VC) can be paired with custody methods and procedures to produce valid, reliable, and trustworthy results. For each component methodology of a comprehensive CCE that would usually require in-person contact, the best practices for using VC and the available empirical research are used to illustrate when VC is acceptable and when it is not. In a completely remote CCE, VC is used to conduct interviews of the adults and children, to conduct psychological testing (to the extent possible), and to conduct parent–child observations. RCCEs retain elements of in-person CCEs such as document retrieval and review and contacts with third-party collaterals—usually by telephone. In order to conduct an RCCE, an evaluator must be competent in both VC use in a professional relationship and in the methodological demands of properly conducting a CCE. However, not every task can be delivered via VC, not every case is appropriate for remote evaluation, not every party or child will agree to using the technology, and not every evaluator will embrace this new approach. Yet progress in a professional specialty like child custody, that looks to science for guidance, is often about generalizations where conclusions obtained in a laboratory or slightly alternative setting are developed, then transported and applied elsewhere in environments that may differ from that in the laboratory or alternative setting (Pearl & Bareinboim, 2014). This is an opportunity to do just that.
This effort is not an attempt to fundamentally alter current CCE processes but to extrapolate and accept the lessons learned about VC use in other areas of psychology in the CCE context. Using VC can enable RCCEs to be viewed as an alternative with an array of possible applications, including situations where COVID-19 or other issues require social distancing, as well as situations where other factors (e.g., access to justice, financial considerations, and resource availability) otherwise limit the choices available to families and the court. It is also possible that a family could choose to have their evaluation conducted remotely using VC for reasons entirely their own.
These issues are of interest to evaluators making decisions about whether to use VC and to conduct RCCEs. These issues are of interest to attorneys as they advise and represent their clients in various contexts including but not limited to litigation. These issues are also of interest to courts and judges who must decide whether an RCCE will help the court, under what circumstances this approach may or may not work, and how to weigh the data generated via VC. Finally, these issues are also of interest to the parties—and ultimately their children—as they weigh the considerations and factors associated with various dispute resolution alternatives and, when necessary, their access to the authority of the court for problem solving.
A Conceptual Model for RCCEs

Child custody evaluation may be the most complex and difficult type of forensic evaluation. In contrast to most examinations in which one person is evaluated, in the typical child custody evaluation, the mental health professional examines a number of persons (e.g., mother, father, child or children, and potential or actual stepparents). Additionally, given the expansive nature of the underlying psycholegal issues (i.e., the best interests of the children and the ability of the parents to meet those interests), the examinees must be assessed regarding a variety of behaviors, capacities, and needs. Finally, because the stakes are so significant (i.e., residential placement of the children and decision-making authority with respect to their welfare), emotions in cases of contested custody typically run high, further compounding what is an already complicated evaluation process. (Otto, Edens, & Barcus, 2000, pp. 312–313)
Competent child custody evaluators, both those conducting in-person CCEs as well as those performing RCCEs, must operationalize the best interests task and objectives, understand how multiple methods are used to gather data on factors and psycholegal questions, and know how to use the multitrait-multimethod matrix interpretation principles of data analysis. The behaviors of the parties and their children and their relationships usually have multiple determinants. There may be few, if any, linear or simple cause-and-effect relationships.
Complex custody disputes almost always involve not just one theory or question but multiple questions and competing theories about highly disputed facts (Dale & Gould, 2014). For the evaluator, these factual disputes require formulating, hypothesizing, and developing opinions to numerous series of questions that are often subsumed under multiple main questions.
Determining what is in the best interests of the child involves answering numerous subquestions about child factors, interfamilial and parenting factors, parent factors, and extrafamilial factors (citation omitted). Each of these factors is composed of subfactors that address separate factual questions about how the age of the child, the child’s gender, and the child’s cognitive and emotional development will affect current and future parent–child interactions and functioning (Krauss & Sales, 1999, p. 96).
In addition, evaluators must recognize any CCE is an assessment of multiple moving targets; people, their circumstances, and their situations may be in a constant state of change in response to the separation or other aspects of the ongoing dispute. Articulating a conceptual lens is necessary because of how much the evaluator must adapt the methodological elements as the evaluation proceeds. The evaluator manages a process that must assess and investigate required topics, be responsive to opportunities for additional details—which may emerge at any point in the process—and adjust inquiries as the data confirms or disconfirms various hypotheses.
The process of any evaluation, whether conducted in person or via VC, is dependent upon a perpetual adaptation of the evaluator’s ability to operationalize best interests considerations and questions, the evaluator’s competence in the use of each of the multiple methods of data collection, and the evaluator’s ability to integrate large amounts of data into a comprehensive understanding of the issues in the case. While there are scientific principles to guide portions of the work, a CCE is still a fact-intensive inquiry and investigation using multiple methods to seek an individualized answer. Diligently applying the conceptual model, the multitrait-multimethod data analysis, and the investigative mindset is the evaluator’s best defense against missing something, against challenges of possible biases, or against performing a less than adequate evaluation.
Scope of a CCE: Best Interests Factors and Case-Specific Psycholegal Questions
In CCEs, evaluators collect data and facts that are used to develop opinions about relevant factors or psycholegal questions, including opinions about the ultimate issues of custody, residency, and parenting time. In making a best interests determination, courts must consider all the factors that may be identified by statute or case law, as well as any relevant factors raised by the parties. If offering an opinion on the ultimate issues of custody and parenting time, evaluators are also expected to consider these factors, and when possible and appropriate, evaluators may use social science research to support their choice of methods, inferences, and opinions.
Evaluators are also encouraged to develop case-specific psycholegal questions to guide their inquiry. “The relevance of the information gathered in the evaluation is directly tied to the clarity and scope of the questions that guide the investigation” (Gould & Martindale, 2009, p. 1). “Clearly defined questions lead the evaluator to choose methods of assessment that measure behaviors directly relevant to questions of concern to the court” (Gould & Martindale, 2007, p. 101). By including specific questions in court orders or stipulations, judges and attorneys increase the likelihood that evaluators will stay on course, investigate the issues of concern, and, in preparing their reports, provide information that bears directly upon the issues before the court (Gould & Martindale, 2009). This process requires considerable pre-evaluation preparation.
Child custody evaluators are often asked to evaluate allegations of risky and/or abusive behaviors such as domestic or intimate partner violence, child sexual abuse, various forms of child maltreatment, or claims of parental alienation or alienated children, as well as a multitude of other behaviors believed to place children at risk for harm, neglect, or adjustment problems. Efforts to assess the historical truth of an allegation, for example, usually involve interviewing all of the involved parties and combining this data with information from relevant records or information from other third-party informants.
Multiple Methods of Data Collection: Five Types of Data Collection
In conducting comprehensive child custody evaluations, evaluators apply theory, research, and scientific methodology (Drozd, Oleson, & Saini, 2013). Evaluators seek information from five types of independent data sources: (a) document or record review; (b) interviews, including individual interviews of the parties and, when appropriate, the children, as well as joint and group interviews, when appropriate; (c) psychological testing; (d) direct observations of parent–child relationships via home or office visits; and (e) contacts with collateral sources or witnesses. VC can be used to collect information from several of these data sources, including interviews, observations, and, in some instances, psychological testing.
Before proceeding, it is important to recognize that agreement about these types of data collection does not always translate into agreement about the actual methodologies that are used. Different evaluators collect different data, and different evaluators may assign different weight to data (Gould, Kirkpatrick, Austin, & Martindale, 2004, p. 39). Some evaluators may rely differently on different portions of the evaluation in developing their hypotheses and opinions. For example, nonpsychologists are less likely to include psychological testing in their evaluation procedures. These evaluators must answer the same questions but may use records, interviews, observations, and contacts with collaterals to address the questions for which a psychologist uses testing. Evaluators unable to effectively use one methodology (e.g., testing) will be expected to develop ways to investigate issues using tools within their competence. The shortcomings of any individual data collection tool require the evaluator to design methods of investigating the relevant issue in other ways. The evaluator’s approach throughout the evaluation process involves choices. For each important issue or data point, does the evaluator immediately query and follow up or accept an answer in order to move on? Does the evaluator compare data or a fact to a claim or hypothesis and again query and challenge, or do they accept and move on?
Conducting in-person interviews, observations, or psychological testing does not guarantee that the evaluator will produce a valid, reliable, or trustworthy work product. Poorly conducted interviews, psychological testing, or observations will likely result in unreliable results. In fact, there often exists as much disagreement as agreement about how each of these methods should be used in evaluations that are conducted in person. Evaluators may differ on how much historical data they collect or on how to weigh this information. With respect to interview techniques, for example, there may be agreement concerning the essential objectives of interviews with parents and with children, but there are disagreements about the degree that these interviews should be structured, with some claiming superiority of structured or semistructured interviews over unstructured interviews (Martindale & Gould, 2004). While many trumpet the importance of parent–child observations, there is no agreed-upon technique or procedure for how to do these observations in CCEs, a fact that raises serious questions about the ecological validity of any inferences based upon any individual evaluator’s parent–child observation procedures (Saini & Polak, 2014). In addition, in response to claims about the inappropriate use of psychological testing in CCEs, the response of a group of evaluators acknowledged problems yet outlined how properly conducted psychological testing can make unique, relevant, and reliable contributions in custody disputes (Rappaport, Gould, & Dale, 2018).
The record keeping of evaluators can become an issue. Some have claimed forensic evaluators have a heightened duty to document their work. Some evaluators take copious notes, while others contemporaneously type questions and answers into a computer during interviews. Some evaluators audio record interviews, and others do not. Currently, evaluators who choose to record must have written permission of the parties. It is unclear, however, whether the parents could provide permission for the evaluator to record a child or whether an attorney or some other kind of representative would be needed to assist a child in making the decision about consent to the evaluator recording such contacts. While the forensic interviews of small children in child protection cases are routinely video and audio recorded, this is not standard practice in CCEs. In other areas of the law, evaluators have generally not been required to record forensic interviews without a showing of exception circumstances (see Holland v. United States, 1988 for a review of the case law regarding this issue in Rule 35 examinations). In addition, in order to avoid unequal treatment of evaluators, any requirement to record RCCEs would probably require that all CCEs, including face-to-face evaluations, be recorded. For a myriad of reasons that are beyond the scope of this article, we view such a proposition as highly unlikely.
The Multitrait-Multimethod Matrix: Data Analysis and Interpretation
In managing their data collection, constructing hypotheses, and developing conclusions or opinions about the factors and psycholegal questions, evaluators have applied the multitrait-multimethod matrix, triangulation strategies, and the concepts of convergent and discriminant validity. In CCEs (and RCCEs), the multitrait-multimethod matrix refers to use of multiple data collection methods and a process for analyzing the data (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). This method recognizes that the behaviors and competencies of individuals are multiply determined (Wälder, 1936) and that the study of complex phenomena requires an active process of developing possible hypotheses and inferences from an evolving data set. Within this process, evaluators seek to avoid bias by maintaining even hovering attention to these multiple hypotheses (Freud, 1912), remaining vigilant to established methods and protocols that they have established, and adjusting the hypotheses as new data and issues are collected. Any deficiency in data collection in one area can be remedied by additional inquiry or by applying a different methodology to get that information. The multitrait-multimethod approach is the evaluator’s best defense against claims of bias or overreliance on simple answers to complex questions (Neal & Brodsky, 2016).
Data analysis strategies using the multitrait-multimethod matrix heavily rely upon triangulation (Austin & Kirkpatrick, 2004). Triangulation involves using more than one approach or more than one data source to study, in this instance, a factor or question. Triangulation enhances reliability and validity by cross-checking or cross-referencing data or by combining different perceptions of the same event to provide a more robust and holistic picture (Vidovich, 2003). Triangulation also includes cross-checking data from multiple methods, sources, theories, and/or data types in order to get a more detailed and balanced picture of the situation (Altrichter, Feldman, Posch, & Somekh, 2008). The term “convergent validation” is used to describe when data from independent procedures support or validate the same conclusion or opinion, and the term “discriminant validation” is used to describe when data from independent procedures fail to support the same conclusions or opinions (Campbell & Fiske, 1959). There also may be times when evaluators must explain seemingly divergent data.
CCEs also usually involve one or more hypothesis or theory about the meaning of various facts and events in the case. “Forensic practitioners ordinarily avoid relying solely on one source of data, and corroborate important data whenever feasible” (American Psychological Association [APA], 2013b, p. 15). In addition, while unique facts can be disclosed or discovered during any part of a CCE, there is generally no one-to-one correspondence between any single evaluation methodology and any best interests factor or psycholegal question. This is especially true when evaluating various kinds of competencies (e.g., parenting competence), where data from multiple sources are relevant.
Evaluating each hypothesis or theory involves a combination of scientific and clinical thinking (Milchman, 2015). The scientific method calls for testing alternative hypotheses or theories and collecting evidence that confirms or disconfirms either an individual hypothesis or unifying theory. Coherence-based reasoning also applies to the evaluator’s data analyses as one attempts to integrate numerous, complex, and sometimes contradictory inferences into a coherent theory about the case (Charman, Douglass, & Mook, 2019). Understanding the implications of any particular hypothesis or theory and the interrelationships between the data and facts of the case is central to determining whether any fact confirms, disconfirms, supports, or disproves that particular hypothesis or theory.
Child custody evaluators attempt to combine two sets of skills that are often presented as opposite extremes: the empirically minded psychometrician and the self-aware clinician. The extremes of this artificial and largely academic debate are captured in the following quote:
In psychometric testing the examiner is seen as a source of error or bias, therefore his role is standardized and minimized, if not eliminated. By contrast, in clinical testing the role of the examiner is maximized: the examiner’s skill, judgment, and intuitive sensitivity are not only valued but are also regarded as the most sensitive and perceptive clinical tools available. The variety of interactional reactions that arise in the patient-examiner relationship are neither avoided nor acted upon; rather, they are identified and observed and then used as valuable aids in bringing greater meaning and understanding to the patient’s behavior and attitudes Clinicians should at all times be able to point to the data from which they draw their conclusions and also to trace out explicitly the chain of inferences that led to those conclusions. (Lerner, 1976, p. 7)
In sum, each evaluator must design a study of the best interests factors and the psycholegal questions that are relevant to each case. There are both common elements to every CCE and unique, case-specific elements to every CCE. The approach is not totally experimental. Whereas scientific experiments seek to eliminate or minimize experimenter bias through methodological design, the custody evaluator’s task is to manage a dynamic process while remaining balanced, objective, and as free as possible from bias.
The Substitutability of VC: Process Considerations

Demonstrating the substitutability of VC for face-to-face procedures can be done through comparisons of two interpersonal process variables and two outcome variables. The two process variables central to CCEs are empathic accuracy and the working alliance. The two outcome variables are positive therapy outcome (e.g., task completion) and studies demonstrating the equivalence of telemental health services provided by VC with those provided face to face.
Empathic Accuracy and the Primary of Auditory and Visual Behaviors Over Nonverbal Cues
Many evaluators are concerned that using VC and conducting RCCEs will result in a reduction in what has been termed “empathic accuracy.” Empathic accuracy is “the ability to perceive accurately how another person is feeling” (Levenson & Ruef, 1992, p. 234). Empathic accuracy is commonly operationalized as the correspondence between the thoughts and feelings people report experiencing and the thoughts and feelings that perceivers infer from the target’s behaviors (Ickes, Bissonnette, Garcia, & Stinson, 1990). Empathic accuracy is a relevant process variable because it is central to effective service delivery in both clinical and forensic psychology. It is an indication of emotional intelligence, and it is a clearly desirable skill for forensic evaluators (Brodsky & Wilson, 2013; Franklin, 2013). Even those with concerns about the uses of expressive empathy by evaluators agree that “empathic understanding” is an important element of forensic assessment (Greenberg & Shuman, 1997, p. 53). Certainly, some level of empathy is necessary for completion of a thorough assessment. While one research study found no significant differences in evaluee disclosures or uses of impression management (e.g., lying) when evaluators actively used expressive empathy versus when evaluators did not use expressive empathy (Vera et al., 2019), evaluators who come across as cold and callous risk discouraging evaluees from being thorough and honest (Franklin, 2013). Many have argued that the internal reaction of forensic evaluators may provide valuable information, if properly used (Erard & Pickar, 2008; Mulay, Mivshek, Kaufman, & Waugh, 2018; Pickar & Erard, 2008).
Empathic accuracy generally depends on visual, auditory, and semantic information—a great deal of which is available through a VC interview. While it is certainly true that people express much of their emotion life in nonverbal behavior (Mehrabian, 1970; Mehrabian, 1981), the proper response in a forensic evaluation to potentially relevant nonverbal behavior is verbal inquiry into possible explanations of what has been observed, not interpretations that are uninformed by an appropriate query. The forensic evaluator’s focus on accuracy should lead to follow-up inquiry into observations of potentially relevant nonverbal behavior with the goal of making explicit potentially relevant emotions, their meaning, and their relevance to the legal questions being investigated.
Studies have found that verbal and contextual cues have more value than nonverbal cues, a fact that supports the necessity of inquiry into possible emotional states associated with nonverbal cues identified by evaluators. Studies of empathic accuracy as an interpersonal process have explored the types of informational cues (i.e., facial expressions or semantic information) that lead others to be able to “read” their emotional expressions (Zaki, Bolger, & Ochsner, 2009). When contextual information is available, empathy accuracy has been shown to be primarily dependent upon verbal and contextual cues rather than nonverbal cues (Gesn & Ickes, 1999; Zaki et al., 2009). Immediate contextual cues (the verbal and nonverbal behaviors that precede each reported thought or feeling) and the cumulative contextual cues (the emergent meaning context that develops as a function of the temporal nature of an interaction) allow one to infer the specific content of a target person’s successive thoughts and feelings (Gesn & Ickes, 1999). Studies have also found that nonverbal expressive people are more “readable” than nonverbal, nonexpressive people (Zaki et al., 2009). Empathic accuracy increases when perceivers have access to both auditory and visual information rather than only auditory or only visual information (Zaki et al., 2009). In RCCEs, evaluators who observe nonverbal behavior should inquire as to the possible thoughts and emotions that the nonverbal behavior reflects.
The desire to actually observe and see all nonverbal behavior is related to concerns about deception and “truth bias.” Truth bias refers to the fact that many individuals believe they can detect deception (Hancock, Woodworth, & Goorha, 2010). Every time new technologies are developed that allow people to communicate at a distance, from the telephone to the telegraph to the invention of the alphabet, the public has registered concerns about increases in lying (see Hancock, 2007). The “cue-availability heuristic” refers to the notion that when there are fewer cues, people might lie more often (Toma & Hancock, 2012). This notion asserts that people might lie more often because there are no nonverbal cues to be detected, and therefore, they are less likely to be discovered than they are in face-to-face interactions (Hancock & Woodworth, 2013). Unfortunately, studies have shown that very few people are good at detecting deceit in interpersonal interactions (Porter, Woodworth, & Birt, 2000). As previously described, inquiry into nonverbal behaviors and the disciplined use of the procedures in the conceptual model are designed to address these concerns to the extent that this is possible.
Indeed, one small study of the effects of telepsychology format on empathic accuracy and therapeutic alliance found no significant differences on these variables in a comparison of VC, telephone, and face-to-face psychotherapy (Reese et al., 2016). Because the clients in this study received only one session of psychotherapy, these results must be considered preliminary, but they are encouraging. However, because we view empathy accuracy as a principle component of successful therapy, the evidence for successful teletherapy also should be viewed as evidence that empathy accuracy is possible through VC. This research is reviewed in this article.
Working Alliance: Maximizing Data Gathering and Completing the Tasks of the Evaluation
The use of empathy in professional relationships is closely connected to the concept of a working alliance. The use of empathy in forensic evaluations may have varying levels of appropriateness, depending upon the nature of the evaluation and the setting in which the evaluation occurs. To the extent it is realistic, an assessment-based working alliance that fosters openness and acceptance should improve the assessment product (Mulay et al., 2018). While there are differences between the working alliance in therapy and in forensic assessment, we again assert that the research on the effectiveness of telemental health procedures should be viewed as evidence that forming a working alliance through VC is possible and achievable.
There may be differences in the working alliance in therapy and the working alliance in CCEs, but there are also numerous similarities. In therapeutic relationships, the working alliance concept includes the emotional bond between the client and therapist, the quality of the client and therapist involvement in the tasks of therapy, and the amount of concordance on goals between the therapist and client (Bordin, 1979). In therapeutic relationships, the working or therapeutic alliance is a central “causal ingredient of change” (Henry, Strupp, Schacht, & Gaston, 1994, p. 485).
In studies of the effectiveness of teletherapy that have found positive and equivalent outcomes, it seems safe to assume the therapists were able to develop successful working and therapeutic alliances. The ability for therapists to establish a working alliance via VC was also demonstrated in a study directly comparing the working alliances of the therapy processes and outcomes of clients randomly assigned to face-to-face, telephone, and VC. This study found no differences on either the working alliance or the outcome variables between the clients receiving services in different ways (Day & Schneider, 2002). In addition, this same study also found that client participation was significantly higher in distance modes (e.g., VC and telephone) than when face to face with their therapists. The researchers speculated that clients in the distance modes made more of an effort to communicate, that they took more responsibility for the interaction, or that distance made openness seem safer (Day & Schneider, 2002).
The working alliance in a forensic CCE is different, but it still involves developing a working alliance. There is a consensus that forensic evaluators should refrain from developing or creating the impression of a helping or therapeutic relationship. The evaluator’s job is to help the court, but this is impossible to do without attending to and developing the evaluator-examinee relationship enough to achieve the goals of learning each party’s parenting plan proposal and investigating the factors or questions that have been identified for evaluation. Whether one argues against empathy in forensic evaluations in the interest of objectivity (e.g., Shuman, 1993) or for moderate empathy in the interest of objectivity (e.g., Brodsky & Wilson, 2013), evaluations involve gathering information from multiple sources. At a minimum, conveying respect for the other person and behaving in a culturally competent, ethical, polite, and professional manner remains a necessary aspect of any evaluator’s behavior (Brodsky & Wilson, 2013). Evaluators who keep a substantial interpersonal distance may be likely to receive truncated information (Jourard, 1971).
A certain level of cooperation is particularly important in RCCEs. Using VC technology for RCCEs is likely a more valid and reliable procedure when the parties agree to its use. Generally, the validity of any psychological assessment is modulated by the degree to which the person being assessed accepts (i.e., is willing to participate in) the context of a given assessment including the setting and the manner in which the assessment is conducted. An individual’s acceptance of a particular type of assessment is a multifaceted construct that depends on an individual’s physical and emotional state, motivation, attention, personality, and temperament (Luxton et al., 2016). Poor acceptance has been cited as a factor that reduces compliance and the motivation to engage in mental health assessments (Rogers, 2001). Inadequate acceptance of telemental health by either the patient or practitioner can therefore be expected to have a negative influence on the validity and reliability of psychological assessments (Luxton, Pruitt, & Osenbach, 2014, p. 28).
Some level of cooperation from the parties is necessary to do an RCCE because elements of the evaluation occur in unsupervised settings.
Provision of telemental health services in professionally unsupervised settings requires that the patient take a more active and cooperative role in the . . . process than in in-person settings. Determining whether a patient [interviewee, added] can handle such demands may be more dependent on the patient’s organizational and cognitive capacities, than on diagnosis. (Turvey et al., 2013, p. 10)
To help assure the validity and reliability of remote assessment, it is necessary to make sure the environmental conditions at the remote location are conducive to the assessment procedures. Ideally, the room would be set up according to the foci of the session (Gloff, LeNoue, Novins, & Myers, 2015, p. 518).
Many patients and families report high satisfaction with telemental health. Reasons for this include (a) conveniently finding high-quality services close to home, (b) decreasing time away from both work and school, (c) decreasing costs associated with traveling miles for care, (d) decreasing stresses of travel with a child with a behavior disorder and siblings, (e) decreasing worries about navigating unfamiliar health care settings, (f) allowing additional supporters to attend and work together to coordinate care, and (g) decreasing stigma by connecting to child-friendly settings such as schools (Gloff et al., 2015; Nelson, Cain, & Sharp, 2017). These same dynamics might apply to the participants in RCCEs.
The Substitutability of VC: The Empirical Outcome and Equivalence Evidence

The use of technologies in mental health and psychological practice has steadily increased over the last decade (Luxton et al., 2014) because studies of the technology demonstrate it can be effectively used to achieve positive, equivalent outcomes. The principles and procedures used for psychological assessment and evaluation during treatment services (i.e., diagnosis and symptom assessment) are pertinent to other remote assessment and testing applications including neuropsychological and cognitive testing, forensic risk assessment, and occupational testing (Luxton et al., 2014). This section reviews the evidence base for telemental health procedures across adult and child populations, assessment and treatment tasks, and numerous clinical and forensic conditions. The authors assert that the consistently positive outcomes and demonstrated equivalence found in these studies support the notion that child custody evaluators, like therapists and other clinical and forensic evaluators, can develop empathic accuracy and working alliances sufficient to produce valid, reliable, and trustworthy child custody evaluations for the courts.
VC in Psychotherapy With Adults
The consensus at this point is that there is sufficient data of efficacy of telepsychology and a lack of data that it is inferior that there is no basis for overriding the choice of an informed client and competent therapist that this is an acceptable alternative under the right circumstances. (Harris, 2019, slide number, 47)
Numerous reviews of the existing research document the feasibility of using VC in psychotherapy with adults. In a systematic literature review of 65 studies across psychotherapy modalities regarding the use of VC psychotherapy (VCP), 10 questions were addressed, including what therapeutic types/formats have used VC, in what populations VCP has been used, the number and types of publications related to VCP, and available satisfaction, feasibility, and outcome data related to VCP (Backhaus et al., 2012). The results indicate that VCP is feasible, has been used in a variety of therapeutic formats and with diverse populations, is generally associated with good user satisfaction, and is found to have similar clinical outcomes to traditional face-to-face psychotherapy (Backhaus et al., 2012). Another review of 26 studies of VC and cognitive–behavioral therapy concluded that the majority of the studies supported the effectiveness of using VC to deliver psychotherapy (Gros et al., 2013).
Recent large randomized controlled trials demonstrate effectiveness of telemental health, with many smaller trials also supporting this conclusion. Regarding specific subgroups, such as patients with psychotic or phobic disorders, one review found no evidence for inferiority of VC telemental health for patients with psychosis (Sharp, Kobak, & Osman, 2011). Another study with psychotic patients compared in-person versus VC interviews and concluded that even patients with delusions pertaining to the TV appropriately responded to VC and did not incorporate their experiences into their delusional system (Dongier, Tempier, Lalinec-Michaud, & Meunier, 1986). A small study comparing in-person versus VC-based treatment for panic disorder with agoraphobia found equal effectiveness (Bouchard et al., 2004).
VC in Forensic Settings: Clinical, Civil Commitment, and Competence Assessments
VC has been used for psychiatric and forensic assessments in corrections environments around the world. In a study of 72 inpatients at a maximum security forensic unit of a state hospital in Washington found good to excellent reliabilities when comparing in-person with VC administrations of the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale-Anchored Version and the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool-Criminal Adjudication (Lexcen, Hawk, Herrick, & Blank, 2006). A study of 21 forensic psychiatric inpatients comparing live interviews to VC interviews using the Georgia Court Competency Test found high levels of agreement between the interviewers (Manguno-Mire et al., 2007). In a study of 190 youth in juvenile detention, telemental health services were found to be associated with youth attaining goals and improving family relations during their incarceration (Fox, Connor, McCullers, & Waters, 2008).
VC has been used to provide forensic opinions in court on mentally disordered offenders in Western Australia (Sullivan, Chapman, & Mullen, 2008) and in involuntary commitment proceedings in rural Australia (Yellowlees, 1997). VC has been used by psychiatrists in the United Kingdom to conduct gate-keeping assessments, prepare psychiatric court reports, and provide courtroom testimony for the criminal and civil courts (Khalifa, Saleem, & Stankard, 2008, pp. 6–8).
VC in Neuropsychological Assessments
Much of the research on the use of VC in test administration originates in neuropsychology (or what is now termed “teleneuropsychology”; Grosch, Gottlieb, & Cullum, 2011). A meta-analytic review of 12 studies of VC-delivered neuropsychological tests found “support for the use of videoconferencing technology in the remote administration of neuropsychological tests, particularly those that rely upon verbal responses from participants” (Brearly et al., 2017, p. 184).
Neuropsychological tests relying upon verbal instructions and responses are particularly well suited to VC administration, and good agreement between VC and face-to-face testing has been found in a number of studies. For example, one study of VC-based neuropsychological assessment versus in-person assessment of subjects with or without cognitive impairment (i.e., dementia) found no significant differences and concluded VC-based neuropsychological testing is a valid and reliable alternative to face-to-face assessment using selected measures (Cullum, Hynan, Grosch, Parikh, & Weiner, 2014). Other research groups comparing clinical diagnostic interviewing conducted via VC and traditional face-to-face conditions has suggested generally good agreement in diagnosing a variety of conditions including dementia (Barton, Morris, Rothlind, & Yaffe, 2011) and Alzheimer’s disease (Loh, Donaldson, Flicker, Maher, & Goldswain, 2007).
VC in Remote Psychological Personality Testing: No Research, But New Guidance
There is currently no known empirical research on remote administration of measures of personality. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, however, test publishers quickly developed methods for remote administration of numerous measures used by evaluators. Tests now available for remote administration include but are not limited to the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) instruments, the Millon inventories, and the Personality Assessment Inventory. For other psychological tests such as the Rorschach, remote administration procedures have also been developed. Remote administration is also possible for instruments like the Behavior Assessment Scale for Children or the Connors Rating Scales, which typically have been given to parents for completion at home.
Given these parameters, VC can be used in remote psychological testing in two ways. First, some research investigations, particularly with some of the cognitive and neuropsychological tests that were previously discussed, have demonstrated that psychologists can use VC to administer certain psychological tests. Some but not all psychological tests lend themselves to remote administration. Remote psychological testing also may be possible with the assistance of monitors or proctors who, in partnership with the psychologist, assist in the administration of the test items and tasks.
Second, VC can be used to allow a monitor or the psychologist evaluator to monitor test administration. Remote administration of psychological tests must consider the potential impact of remote administration procedures on the validity and reliability of the results (Corey & Ben-Porath, 2020). Therefore, “although these professional practice guidelines provide little practical instruction on how to ensure adherence to applicable ethical standards when administering psychological tests remotely, they do highlight an issue that is fundamental to understanding the challenge in remote psychological testing” (Corey & Ben-Porath, 2020, p. 200). Guideline 7 states,
When a psychological test or other assessment procedure is conducted via telepsychology, psychologists are encouraged to ensure that the integrity of the psychometric properties of the test or assessment procedure (e.g., reliability and validity) and the conditions of administration indicated in the test manual are preserved when adapted for use with such technologies. (APA, 2013a, p. 798)
The emphasis when using VC is on preserving the conditions of administration outlined in the test manual, whether this is in direct test administration or monitoring of someone completing a self-report instrument. For example, in a section titled “Testing Conditions,” the MMPI-2 manual describes the following:
The typical testing situation for administering the MMPI-2 requires adequate space at a table to lay out the test booklet and answer sheet, good lighting, a comfortable chair, and quiet surroundings free of intrusions and distractions. However, it is often not possible to provide an ideal testing environment. For example, the hardcover version makes it possible to take the test in a waiting room or while sitting up in a bed in a hospital ward. In such settings. Precautions must be taken to ensure that the person taking the test is not bothered by others in the room or offered gratuitous advice by fellow patients. It is generally permissible to let the individual take the test in several shorter sessions over a limited period of time, say before or after an interruption for routine procedures. (Butcher et al., 2001, p. 9)
A Case Example of Remote MMPI-2 Administration
In the initial VC CCE interview between the evaluator, Father (at home in city 60 miles from evaluator), and Mother (at home in city 180 miles from evaluator), the evaluator reviewed the court order and evaluation procedures. The court order included a provision allowing the evaluator to use VC. The parties and their attorneys agreed to this order.
After the evaluator’s initial joint interview with Father and Mother conducted via VC (using GoToMeeting, which is HIPAA compatible and securely encrypted), Father and Mother were directed to remain at their respective computers (where there is adequate lighting and a comfortable chair) with no one else around or in the room (e.g., distraction-free environment) to await an e-mail with a link to the portal through which they could complete the psychological testing. On his computer, the evaluator logged onto Pearson Q global and sent Father an e-mail, confirmed Father’s receipt of that e-mail, and confirmed that Father was able to connect to the Pearson website via the link in the e-mail in order to take the test. Father began the test. The evaluator and Mother went through the same procedure until Mother was connected to the Pearson website and taking the test.
The evaluator remotely monitored Father and Mother via VC while they were taking the test. The evaluator silenced his audio input and intermittently closed the ability of Father and Mother to see him. However, Father and Mother were prohibited from shutting down their audio or visual inputs. Through this continuous supervision, the evaluator confirmed that Father and Mother took the test without any outside assistance or distractions. At the end of taking the test, Father and Mother each signed off the Pearson portal, and their test responses were sent to Pearson.
The evaluator logged onto Pearson again, located the respective test protocols, and generated an MMPI-2 Extended Score Report for each test taker. In order to conduct the critical item review with Father, Mother was excused from the VC connection. She signed off. The evaluator and Father stayed connected, and the evaluator conducted his critical item interview. When this was completed, Father was instructed to sign off and did so. Mother was contacted by cell phone and instructed to sign back on to the conference. When she did, the evaluator completed a critical item interview with her.
Telemental Health Evidence Base for Use of VC With Children and Adolescents

Today’s youth comfortably communicate with peers and family members using information and communication technologies such as Skype, WhatsApp, FaceTime, Facebook Messenger, and a host of others (Saini & Polak, 2014). Telemental health may be especially suited for youth who frequently use the technology and may positively respond to the personal space and feeling of control allowed by VC. Videoconferencing may also offer advantages in working with adolescents, including less self-consciousness, increased personal space, and decreased confidentiality concerns as the provider is outside of the local community (Myers et al., 2017).
VC Use in Therapy With Children and Adolescents
To be included as a feasible accommodation in an RCCE, evaluators interviewing children using VC must be able to establish rapport with the child, develop adequate cooperation, and develop an alliance sufficient to gather data and information on a wide variety of topics. Interviews of the children in custody disputes are a central, essential, and often required element of child custody evaluations (Ackerman & Pritzl, 2011; Bow & Quinnell, 2004). There exists a substantial literature on interviewing children in custody cases (Saywitz, Camparo, & Romanoff, 2010; Warshak, 2003). Information from these interviews informs the evaluator on several important issues. State statutes often have several child-related best interests factors that must be considered by the court. These factors include but are not limited to the child’s preferences, the child’s adjustment, and the parent–child relationship. The perspectives of children are also crucial to an assessment of the children’s needs, the parental capacities for meeting these needs, and the resulting fit (APA, 2010). While the use of children as witnesses can stir controversy, their accounts of events in the home or in the life of the family or various family members, as well as accounts of the behaviors of others, can be helpful to understanding various allegations, claims, and stories. While children do not normally expect to make the custody decisions, many children, particularly older children, want to be heard on the issues that affect them (Cashmore & Parkinson, 2008).
Support for using VC interviews with children and adolescents in CCEs comes from multiple sources. In 2017, the American Telemedicine Association (ATA) developed the “Practice Guidelines for Telemental Health for Children and Adolescents” (CATMH) regarding use of Internet-based and telephone-based VC. The guidelines focus on interactive VC with the goal of providing the same level of service delivery that is provided in person. CATMH programs involving clinical evaluation and treatments have been successfully implemented in multiple diverse settings such as pediatric clinics (Myers, Sulzbacher, & Melzer, 2004), community mental health centers, rural schools, urban daycare, corrections (Myers, Valentine, & Melzer, 2008), and independent practice (Grady et al., 2011). CATMH has been applied to diverse populations such as African American, Hispanic, Hawaiian, Native American, and Alaska Native youth (Myers et al., 2017).
The professional and research literature documents the ability of mental health professional to use VC to successfully fulfill professional roles and complete professional tasks. “Child and adolescent telemental health has been practiced successfully across underserved settings with diverse youth, for most psychiatric disorders, and across development” (Nelson et al., 2017, p. 77). Development of a therapeutic alliance is a robust predictor of positive outcome in mental health treatment and is particularly important when working with children and adolescents.
The single most effective means of establishing an alliance with young people is conversation (Gloff et al., 2015). Experienced teleclinicians and preliminary research suggest that clinicians and patients can, and do, establish a therapeutic alliance during telemental health treatments (Goldstein & Glueck, 2016). Satisfaction studies demonstrate the ability to develop a therapeutic alliance with youth and families through telemental health (ATA, 2018). Only occasionally do children and adolescent patients rate alliance, or rapport, as significantly lower for telemental health versus the in-person modality.
The feasibility of delivering psychotherapy through VC has been demonstrated for agoraphobia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, bulimia nervosa, depression, obsessive–compulsive disorder, panic disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder (Nelson et al., 2017). It also has been shown to be effective in working with children with autism and other developmental disorders (Szeftel, Federico, Hakak, Szeftel, & Jacobson, 2012).
VC Use in Forensic Interviews of Children Regarding Possible Child Abuse
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, child protective service agencies across the country have turned to what are being called “tele-forensic interviews” in cases of possible child abuse and neglect. These interviews utilize synchronous VC while interviewing young children in cases involving suspected child abuse, sexual abuse, or neglect. In March 2020, a team from the National Children’s Alliance, Montclair State University, and Central Michigan University developed an extensive protocol for “Emergency Tele-Forensic Guidelines.” These guidelines include detailed instructions for choosing to do the interview as well as how to conduct it (National Children’s Alliance, 2020). In their training webinar, one presenter reported on a yet-to-be published research project comparing interviews conducted by VC with interviews conducted in person. The research involved interviews of 230 children who were 4 to 8 years old using a staged event (e.g., a touching by a male assistant), after which the children were provided misinformation about the event by their parents before being interviewed either face-to-face or by videoconferencing. Preliminary results indicate there were no differences between the accuracy of reports gathered by VC as compared to in-person interviews. There were no differences between true and false reports and no differences with source monitoring problems. While there were age differences showing that younger children were less talkative, there were no indications that children were more suggestible in the VC interviews (National Children’s Alliance, 2020).
A separate experimental research project studied the memory reports of 100 children between the ages of 5 and 12 and found that “video-feed interviewing was just as effective as face-to-face interviewing in terms of the accuracy and informativeness of children’s accounts” (Hamilton, Whiting, Brubacher, & Powell, 2016, p. 260). The children were interviewed by experienced interviewers 1 to 2 days after they participated in an innocuous event.
VC in Parent–Child Therapy, Parent–Child Observations, and Family Therapy
The central purpose of conducting observations of parent–child interactions is to provide an important source of information for assessing parent–child connections and dynamics, to focus on each parent’s ability to respond to the needs of the child, observe a child’s response to each parent, and to consider potential risks and concerns within the parent–child relationship or contextual factors that may impede or facilitate these relationships. (Saini & Polak, 2014, pp. 185–186)
Many are concerned that use of VC for parent–child observations may not be feasible or might yield less helpful or less reliable information than in-person observations. This is already a concern about in-person CCEs. The available research on observations during evaluations shows considerable variability between evaluators, which suggests that evaluators may not be systematically studying the same dimensions of parenting (Saini & Polak, 2014). Whether or not a parent–child observation is valid and reliable depends upon how the task is introduced, how the task is interpreted by the parent and child (or children), and what happens when performing the task.
If properly used, it is possible that synchronous VC technology could enhance the ecological validity of the parent–child observations (Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017). Several studies have found VC as effective as in-person service delivery in addressing parent–child interactions. For example, remotely conducted parent–child interaction therapy (PCIT) has been shown to be feasible and to have comparable outcomes to clinic-based treatments with several small subgroups of children with anxiety-related conditions (such as obsessive–compulsive disorder; Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017) and externalizing youth (Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017).
In-office PCIT uses real-time, in-session parent coaching where the therapist monitors family interactions from an observation room and provides live, individualized coaching via a parent-worn bug-in-the-ear device (Crum & Comer, 2016, p. 230). Internet PCIT simply changes the location of the therapist from behind a screen in another room to feedback from a remote location through a Bluetooth earpiece. In addition, behavioral parent training for parents and their children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder found similar effectiveness rates among those who received the services online versus those who received services face to face (Dupaul et al., 2017). Obviously, there is a need to adequately capture the parent–child interaction via VC in order for this process to work.
In addition, the use of videos for a broad spectrum of consultation, research, and therapy purposes has been well documented. For example, video observations have been central to research on attachment and early parent–infant relationships (Gridley, Bywater, & Hutchings, 2018; Rusconi-Serpa, Sancho Rossignol, & McDonough, 2009; Steele et al., 2014).
Logistical problems increase as the number of people in the VC increases. There is no data on family therapy by VC. Critical issues specific to family-based telemental health care include (a) navigating varying levels of technological literacy across generations of participants, (b) deciding which family members to include, (c) ensuring the safety of participant, (d) optimizing therapeutic alliance and engagement of all participants, (e) navigating logistical concerns in conducting sessions, and (f) ensuring privacy (Crum & Comer, 2016). These developments demonstrate that such technological innovations can be used to overcome many traditional barriers to effective care (Comer et al., 2015), but no research on these issues is currently available.
The Ethics of Using VC in RCCEs

The practice of telemental health, including VC, involves consideration of ethical standards, legal requirements, telecommunication technologies, and individual practitioner policies and procedures that must be balanced with any other external constraints or demands of the particular professional context (APA, 2013a). The same ethical standards for delivering in-person services apply to professionals providing services using VC. It is the professional’s responsibility to maintain and enhance their level of understanding of their professional ethics, the concepts specific to VC service delivery (APA, 2013a), and to integrate any unique demands using VC might have on their work into their policies, practices, and procedures.
The goal of most telemental health services is to approximate the same best practices of in-person service delivery (APA, 2013a). Generally, the same liabilities, risks, and ethical issues encountered during in-person practice apply to telemental health. The APA Telepsychology Task Force provides eight telepsychology-specific guidelines for practitioners (see Table 1;
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Eight Guidelines for Practice of Telepsychology (APA, 2013a)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
APA, 2013a). These guidelines address issues of competence, standards of care in the delivery of telepsychology services, informed consent, confidentiality of data and information, security and transmission of data and information, disposal of data and information and technologies, testing and assessment, and interjurisdictional practice.
However, the geographical distance between the provider and service recipient and the use of technology as the medium of service provision introduce additional risks and considerations that extend beyond those of conventional in-person services (Luxton et al., 2016). In its guidelines for informed consent when using video-based technology, the ATA identified several situation-specific conditions that must be addressed as part of ethical telemental health practice (see Table 2;
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. American Telemedicine Association Guidelines for Informed Consent and Preparation for Sessions
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Turvey et al., 2013, p. 11).
Evaluators using VC to conduct RCCEs must meet the ethical standards of their respective disciplines and apply these ethical standards to the virtual task. Evaluators using VC must establish appropriate verification, confidentiality, and security parameters consistent with the CCE and the privacy interests of the parties (Shore et al., 2018). This includes taking care to verify the identity of those being interviewed or observed, using procedures to protect the privacy of those being interviewed, and using technology with adequate security protections. Evaluators also must provide use technologies that provide quality audio and video images for the interviews or observations.
Another ethical issue reflects allegiance to the principles of evidence-based or evidence-informed practice. In the context of CCEs, evaluators expect that, when providing opinions and testimony based on novel or emerging principles or methods, they make known the status and limitations of these principles and methods (APA, 2013a, p. 9). Standard 9.02 (“Use of Assessments”) of the Ethics Code is particularly relevant when considering an alternative method of assessment, be this an alternative interviewing technique or test administration:
Psychologists administer, adapt, score, interpret, or use assessment techniques, interviews, tests, or instruments in a manner and for purposes that are appropriate in light of the research on or evidence of the usefulness and proper application of the techniques.
Psychologists use assessment instruments whose validity and reliability have been established for use with members of the population tested. When such validity or reliability has not been established, psychologists describe the strengths and limitations of test results and interpretation. (APA, 2017)
Best Practice Guidelines for VC
Evaluators who use VC must competently and reasonably adapt the best practice guidelines that have been developed for VC and other telemental health service deliveries to the CCE context. Like the detailed provisions of the conceptual model outlined earlier, best practice guidelines emphasize consistent practices and are designed to reduce practitioner errors. It is important to assume competent use of VC in considering its use. Many opposed to using VC cite fears and problems that are often easily remedied with adequate planning and forethought. For example, some have noted concerns about the identity of the person being interviewed or that another person might be present in the room coaching the interviewee, either adult or child, about how to answer certain questions. These concerns can be dispelled by scanning the room prior to or even during interviews. The value of use of VC should be judged on the “steel man argument” (what is likely when competent practices are followed) rather than a “straw man argument” (where those using VC are characterized as making silly mistakes that reflect incompetence in the evaluator rather than problems in the technique).
The acceptance of use of VC technology in clinical practice, as shown by numerous professional theory and evidence-informed best practice guidelines, is undeniable. For psychiatrists, the American Psychiatric Association has recognized VC as a legitimate service delivery mechanism since 1998 and, in 2018, together with the ATA, promulgated a statement, “Best Practices in Videoconferencing-Based Telemental Health” (Shore et al., 2018). The American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2008) introduced its guidelines, “Practice Parameter for Telepsychiatry With Children and Adolescents,” in 2008. For psychologists, the APA issued “Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology” in 2013. The APA guidelines were presented as informed by professional theories, evidence-based practices, and definitions in an effort to offer the best guidance in the practice of telepsychology (APA, 2013a). For social workers, a group of professional organizations (National Association of Social Workers, Association of Social Work Boards, Council on Social Work Education, & Clinical Social Work Association, 2017) created the “Standards for Technology in Social Work Practice” in 2017.
In addition, telepractitioners are developing their own professional identity and have promulgated additional evidence-based best practice guidelines. The ATA, an interdisciplinary professional group, has published multiple practice guidelines. These include (a) “Evidence-Based Practice for Telemental Health” in 2009 (published in 2011), (b) “Practice Guidelines for Videoconferencing-Based Telemental Health” in 2009, (c) “Practice Guidelines for Video-Based Online Mental Health Service” in 2013 (Turvey et al., 2013), (d) “A Lexicon of Assessment and Outcome Measures for Telemental Health” in 2013 (Shore et al., 2014), and (e) “Practice Guidelines for Telemental Health with Children and Adolescents” in 2017 (Myers et al., 2017).
Deviations from the guidelines may be acceptable, but departures from customary protocols must be justified.
If circumstances warrant, a practitioner may responsibly pursue a course of action different from the guidelines when, in the reasonable judgment of the practitioner, such action is indicated by the condition of the patient, restrictions or limits on available resources, or advances in information or technology subsequent to publication of the guidelines. Nonetheless, a practitioner who uses an approach that is significantly different from these guidelines is strongly advised to provide documentation, in the patient record, that is adequate to explain the approach pursued. (Turvey et al., 2013, p. 5)
Practical Considerations Regarding Using VC in Assessments and Therapy
Parties agreeing to an RCCE must be functionally capable of using the technology. While no studies have specifically identified any patient subgroup that does not benefit from, or is harmed by, mental health care provided through remote VC (Turvey et al., 2013), professionals using VC must determine that interviewees are intellectually, emotionally, physically, linguistically, and functionally capable of using the technology (Luxton et al., 2016). “Other key telepractice elements include assessment of the impact of culture on the client/patient’s (a) overall comfort/socialization with the behavioral health system; (b) comfort and familiarity with the technology; (c) communication, rapport, and trust; and (d) perceptions of confidentiality” (Luxton et al., 2016, paragraph 1758).
“Working via technology, then, also requires an understanding of how technology alters a professional clinical relationship and how to compensate for such alterations” (Luxton et al., 2016, paragraph 149). Establishing rapport and an alliance in the provider-interviewee relationship is as important in interactive VC as it is in in-person contact. Rapport allows for the interviewee to be more forthcoming with past and current history and cognitive and emotional experiences. While using VC, interviewers may need to flexibly and creatively adjust how they can communicate things such as understanding or empathy (Grady et al., 2011, p. 136). Verbal communications may be more deliberate to adjust for any auditory lags related to technology use and to clearly indicate when the teleprovider has finished speaking in order to facilitate reciprocity in communication (Nelson et al., 2017, p. 77).
Possible Limitations
There are limitations to use of VC, both in general and within RCCEs. “The lack of physical presence may limit the range of information available or how it can be observed” (Luxton et al., 2014, p. 28). Nonverbal information is useful for determining the patient’s emotional state and, in some cases, risk behaviors. For example, olfactory sensory information can provide clinically relevant information regarding hygiene as well as the use of alcohol or other substances. The observation of psychomotor and other medical symptoms is also important to observe during psychological assessments. VC assessments may be influenced by camera angle, screen size, room characteristics, or other technical factors that prohibit the observation of all behaviors. The lack of physical presence, however, may limit the range of information available, how it can be observed, or how the patient presents (Luxton et al., 2014). This is not, however, an insurmountable obstacle.
Home-based telemental health services may not be appropriate if there is a serious concern for patient safety (Gloff et al., 2015). “Certain high-risk families, such as families with maltreatment histories, may be inappropriate for remote telemental healthcare” (Comer & Myers, 2016, p. 299). Patients with a history of adverse reactions to treatment (e.g., severe panic attacks) or those who are at high risk of harm to self or others (e.g., family members in the case of home-based telemental health) may not be appropriate for telemental assessment (Luxton, O’Brien, McCann, & Mishkind, 2012).
Providers are expected to consider geographic location, technological competence (both psychologist and client/patient), medical conditions, mental status and stability, psychiatric diagnosis, current or historic use of substances, treatment history, and therapeutic needs that may be relevant to assessing the appropriateness of the services offered. Prior to engaging in remote assessments, it is wise to review the patient’s clinical history to determine potential clinical, cognitive, and/or sensory deficits that could impair their ability to use telehealth technology (APA, 2013a). While telemental health developed out of a need in underserved rural population areas, patients in densely populated areas also have benefitted from decreased travel times caused by high traffic volumes that make traveling even short distances a problem.
Defending VC in RCCEs in Court: The Evidentiary Argument

Evaluators choosing to use VC in RCCEs may face challenges in court about whether their methods meet the legal standards for admissibility of expert testimony found in the Daubert trilogy and/or the Frye case for admissibility of expert testimony (Flynn, 2019). To successfully defend their work product, evaluators must demonstrate that they qualify as an expert with competencies in CCEs and the technology that was used and that they have properly and reliably collected sufficient relevant data and facts to support their inferences, conclusions, and opinions.
The position espoused here is that the uniqueness of a child custody evaluation is found in the conceptual model for the evaluation that informs the collection of data and facts and in the manner in which the analysis of the data and facts is conducted, not in the data collection methods themselves. That is, both clinical and forensic evaluations involve gathering information from documents, interviews, observations, and testing in order to address the presenting problem(s) or situation. These contextual considerations are, of course, very important, but RCCEs should be independently considered based on their scientific and empirical merit rather than on general acceptance among like-minded members of some guild (Faigman, 2013, pp. 908–909). In each instance, there are requirements to establish rapport, elicit cooperation with the data collection task, and objectively collect data and facts about the presenting problem(s) and situation. In both clinical and forensic settings, evaluators are expected to apply the same intellectual rigor to the tasks (Kumho v. Carmichael, 1999). Accuracy and objectivity are always important, whether informing treatment of a patient or helping the court in a legal dispute. By following these principles, evaluators performing RCCEs can produce valid and reliable reports that will help courts in their efforts to revolve custody disputes.
Conclusion

The COVID-19 pandemic has at least temporarily and perhaps permanently changed the landscape of mental health service delivery, including the conduct of child custody evaluations. Currently and into the foreseeable future, some CCEs must be remotely done via VC to ensure the safety of the parties and the evaluators. The learning curve for using these technologies in this context is a steep one. There is a lot to learn and a need to learn and apply it quickly. VC can become the lens through which data and facts are collected (J. W. Gould, personal communication, June 20, 2020). Evaluators must use technologies that provide high-quality audio and video images for the interviews and observations. Evaluators need to be prepared to provide information regarding the technology they used, why they chose that technology, and how that technology worked during the data collection interviews or observations. They must establish that they used appropriate verification, confidentiality, and security parameters consistent with the CCE and the privacy interests of the parties (Shore et al., 2018).
Family courts that were overwhelmed prior to the pandemic are likely to be even more overwhelmed when they reopen. There likely will be many changes, but the need for the help of experts, including custody evaluators, is likely to remain a priority. For evaluators who conduct RCCEs, the new competence requirements will encompass both CCE and telemental health methods. In these evaluations, evaluators must think through, individualize, and adapt methodologies to help the court answer the questions that were the foci of the dispute.
This article articulated a conceptual model illustrating a dynamic, flexible process-oriented approach to creating and defining the scope of the evaluation and collecting data and facts from multiple sources, as well as a process that combines scientific and investigative principles for analyzing this information via comparisons with hypotheses and theories about the case. Regardless of whether a CCE is conducted in person or remotely via VC, evaluators must be able to describe and explain their choices of how they investigated the relevant factors and the psycholegal questions that were the foci of the evaluation and the ways analysis connects the data and facts to their conclusions and recommendations.
This article details the growth of the telemedicine and telemental health communities over the past 10 to 15 years from an alternative to reach underserved populations to an alternative within the mainstream mental health professions. This growth is mainly a story of successful applications across people of different ages, different clinical and forensic populations, and different clinical and forensic tasks. In the absence of a vaccine for COVID-19, it is difficult to think of safe mental health service delivery without accommodations. Properly conducted RCCE may be a necessary safe substitute for in-person processes. There are limitations and situations where VC may not be a safe alternative, but the child custody community—for example, courts, attorneys, evaluators, and families—should accept RCCEs as a valid alternative that, when properly done, can help resolve custody disputes.",
"3": "In November 2019, COVID-19—the infectious, highly communicable, and potentially fatal disease caused by a novel coronavirus—originated in Wuhan, China. Within months, its devastating impact had spread worldwide. By April 2020, the United States had the highest number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and COVID-19-related deaths in the world (World Health Organization, 2020). Faced with its most significant public health emergency in modern history, virtually all aspects of U.S. health care were impacted. The American Psychological Association (APA) was quick to provide guidance to mental health practitioners, researchers, and policymakers who faced unprecedented hurdles for conducting their work. Almost immediately, e-mental health (also referred to as telepsychology) was the logistical solution put into practice (Liu et al., 2020; Perrin et al., 2020).
E-mental health is the procurement, storage, sharing, and provision of mental health information and services via electronic communication including online databases, telephone, videoconferencing (live, two-way interactions), email, interactive websites, software applications (i.e., apps), and social media. It can be conducted synchronously (in-the-moment) or asynchronously (training modules, email, etc.) and stand-alone or supplement traditional mental health care protocol. It can take place in emergency rooms, outpatient clinics, independent practice—virtually any mental health setting acting as a “hub” for services. Dating back to 1959, e-mental health is associated with improved accessibility, flexibility, reduced costs, times savings, decreased self-stigma, and consumer engagement (Cowan et al., 2019; Lal & Adair, 2014; Luxton et al., 2016). From 2010 to 2017, the United States increased psychiatric e-mental health (i.e., mental health services, such as medication prescribing and management, provided by medical professionals) in state-run facilities from 15% to 29% (Spivak et al., 2020). Several subspecialties of psychology—most notably, counseling psychology—have built evidence bases for its practice (Jacobsen & Kohout, 2010; Luxton et al., 2011). Heilbrun and Brooks (2010) set assessing development and impact of new technologies as part of a proposed agenda for forensic psychology over 10 years ago, but a decade later, forensic psychology’s technology use and exploration lags behind its counterparts.
Regarding COVID-19, jails and prisons became “hot spots” for disease transmission (Williams & Ivory, 2020). Correctional settings make for close quarters, and COVID-19 transmission precautions (e.g., limiting one-on-one interactions, social distancing) are nearly impossible for individuals who are incarcerated. Recognizing the high risk for COVID-19 infection, some correctional institutions put into place protective policies such as prohibiting face-to-face visitation (Federal Bureau of Prisons, 2020), including those for forensic mental health practitioners. This severely limited the judicial system’s access to individuals who are incarcerated and incarcerated individuals’ access to mental health evaluation and treatment.
Technology as applied to court settings is not new. Videoconferencing has long been common between the courts and correctional settings and is a feasible alternative to in-person hearings (Davis et al., 2015). Defendants have reported the same level of satisfaction and collaboration with their attorneys whether they were communicating in-person or over videoconference (McDonald et al., 2016), and mental health experts have testified via videoconference for decades (U.S. v. Gigante, 1999).
Psychiatric e-mental health has made significant progress in correctional settings with diverse clientele across the world (Magaletta et al., 1998; Mars et al., 2012; Maruschak et al., 2016; Senanayake et al., 2018; Shore et al., 2008). A systematic review of psychiatric e-mental health videoconferencing services produced 89 studies that cumulatively suggested this service method has reliability and acceptability in forensic settings and the courts, savings in costs and travel, and enhanced safety and security (Sales et al., 2018). As of 2016, 28 state Department of Corrections systems offered psychiatric e-mental health in conjunction with in-person services (Maruschak et al., 2016). According to North Carolina’s prison system, psychiatric e-mental health “has been invaluable in linking providers to incarcerated people housed in remote prisons where it is not feasible to have a provider based on site” (Sheitman & Williams, 2019, p. 356). Accessibility is increasingly important, considering approximately 20% of jail inmates across the United States are housed in rural jails, most of which are difficult to reach and do not have on-site treatment providers (Kang-Brown & Subramanian, 2017).
There is sound reasoning for why forensic e-mental health is a good option for the evaluation and intervention of justice-involved individuals. Individuals who are incarcerated have higher levels of mental health needs than the general public (Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2017), and are, arguably, among those who need psychological attention the most. They are frequently diagnosed with co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders, and have higher rates of traumatic brain injury, requiring complex treatment approaches (Beaudette & Stewart, 2016; Bronson & Berzofsky, 2017; Kessler et al., 2003; Prins, 2014; Shiroma et al., 2012; Sung et al., 2010). In vivo and psychiatric e-mental health modalities (such as medication management) are often critical, but frequently insufficient without other forms of mental health intervention such as psychotherapy and coping skills development. Yet the systems put in place to address the needs of justice-involved individuals are often underresourced and marginalized. In many forensic settings, medication management is the extent of mental health treatment available.
Although the COVID-19 crisis has been unique, it provided impetus for the field to critically examine forensic mental health practice, research, and policy and their relationships with technology. “Non-clinical” psychology-law colleagues have practice, research, and policy recommendations on technology-focused topics such as body-worn cameras (Lum et al., 2019) and recording interrogations and eyewitness lineups (Fitzgerald et al., 2018; Kassin et al., 2019; Wells et al., 2020). Technology as applied to forensic mental health is a developing area; however, it is still lacking when considering the many mental health needs of justice-involved individuals. What forensic e-mental health research is available? What legal and mental health needs can be sufficiently addressed via forensic e-mental health, and which should be prioritized for research? How can we integrate practice and research into policy, and how can they complement one another? To address these questions, we present evidence and scholarly commentaries on forensic e-mental health evaluation and intervention, which are used to recommend action for research and policy.
Review: Components of Forensic E-Mental Health

Forensic Evaluation
Forensic mental health evaluation is a key component of clinical forensic practice and includes clinical interview and assessment of specific legal issues (e.g., criminal competencies, mental state at the time of the offense, violence risk). Technology-related research has examined the assessment process and use of electronic collateral sources. By far, most forensic e-mental health research involves one’s competency to proceed.
Competency to Proceed
A 2019 survey of 156 forensic mental health evaluators indicated that approximately 28% had conducted a competency to proceed evaluation via videoconference (Batastini et al.), although this percentage is likely much higher in the aftermath of COVID-19. In one of the first studies to examine standardized evaluations of competence to proceed via videoconference (Lexcen et al., 2006), researchers administered the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale-Anchored Version (BPRS-V) and the MacArthur Competence Assessment Tool-Criminal Adjudication (MacCAT-CA) to a sample of 72 inpatient forensic evaluatees. In the first group, measures were administered by a “local” (in-person) evaluator, while a second, remote evaluator observed and scored administrations over videoconference. In the second group, the remote evaluator administered the measures while the local evaluator observed and scored the measures. In the third group, one local evaluator administered the measures, while a second local evaluator observed and scored only. Although the experimental conditions lacked ecological validity, findings demonstrated adequate interrater reliabilities across the evaluator groups, which provided support that remote BPRS-V and MacCAT-CA administration was not a significant departure from local administration, and can potentially serve as a reliable component of evaluating competence to proceed.
A randomized controlled trial of competency evaluations using another tool—the Georgia Court Competency Test–Mississippi State Hospital revision (GCCT-MSH)—demonstrated similar results. Manguno-Mire et al. (2007) randomized forensic inpatients to either local or remote videoconference evaluation formats. In the first condition, a primary evaluator administered the GCCT-MSH locally, while a second evaluator scored the measure remotely. In the second condition, the primary evaluator administered the measure remotely, while the second evaluator scored the measure locally. The results were promising, in that GCCT-MHS scores across conditions had impressive (r ∼ .92) interrater reliabilities. These findings along with Lexcen et al. (2006) are encouraging, but should not be interpreted as full and certain support for remote competency evaluations. Specifically, it should be noted that Lexcen et al. (2006) and Manguno-Mire et al. (2007) had limited sample sizes. Further, these studies examined only one psychometric property: interrater reliability of scores from specific competency measures. Standardized assessment performance reflects only one data point an evaluator may consider when rendering an opinion of a defendant’s competency. To date, it remains unclear if the validity of evaluators’ competency determinations would vary as a function of the evaluation format.
Technology as Collateral Information
Collateral sources are requisite for conducting an informed and thorough forensic evaluation (Heilbrun et al., 2014). Consistent with the broad definition of e-mental health, “Googling” clients may be one technological avenue of procuring collateral information related to mental health symptoms and status. Although this practice is generally viewed as a breach of privacy that is unacceptable in typical clinical contexts, the rules shift in forensic evaluation, when collateral information is key to prudent practice. Further, additional electronic collateral information, such as recorded Miranda waivers, surveillance and bodycam video, email, Internet searches, and social media posts, is more readily available for evaluators’ considerations as technology has proliferated.
Although forensic mental health scholars have begun to discuss the risks and benefits of Internet-derived data (see Batastini & Vitacco, 2020), there has been little empirical investigation into the matter. In a survey of 102 forensic evaluators, 63.7% reported using social media as collateral information, most often in mental state and child custody evaluations (Coffey et al., 2018). In general, evaluators reported that social media information was not as helpful in developing their forensic opinion as were hospital and police records, clinical interview, surveillance tapes, support staff, and family members. Nevertheless, evaluators did indicate that social media could be helpful in corroborating mental illness, assessing mental state, and determining functional abilities. Interestingly, some evaluators reported using social media (e.g., blogs and podcasts) as data specifically for scoring risk assessment tools. Primary apprehensions over social media use in forensic evaluations included concerns about authenticity, reliability, privacy, consent, and relevance. This small pool of evaluators does not represent the field at large, and evaluators should consider Internet-based data as a form of collateral information to be sought on an individual case basis (Pirelli et al., 2016). Prudent evaluators will consult ethical codes, specialty guidelines, and clinical manuals specific to forensic psychology for determining appropriate use before seeking Internet-based data (Batastini & Vitacco, 2020; Pirelli et al., 2017).
Forensic Intervention
In a 2012 practitioner survey, psychotherapists projected that technology would play a key role in psychotherapy by the year 2020 (Norcross et al., 2013). Indeed, technological capabilities have quickly advanced how practitioners conduct mental health intervention since Smith and Glass’s (1977) landmark meta-analysis demonstrating psychotherapy’s effectiveness. In fact, enough literature has been produced that e-mental health interventions have also been meta-analyzed, demonstrating that psychotherapy conducted by telephone or videoconference produce results similar to in-person therapeutic exchanges and is feasible for practice (Backhaus et al., 2012; Jenkins-Guarnieri et al., 2015). With the advent of smart phones, self-management mobile apps have gained in popularity in general, but also in treatment technology (Linardon et al., 2019). Smartphone apps can track moods and physiological functioning, facilitate skills acquisition, serve as virtual coaches, time-stamp mental health-related “assignments,” come preprogrammed with psychoeducation resources and crisis contact information, act as reminders for therapy or other appointments, and provide GPS navigation and monitoring (Luxton et al., 2011).
While general psychotherapy e-mental health has proliferated, forensic e-mental health treatment and intervention has inched behind. This is a missed opportunity. Up to 26% of jail inmates and 14% of prisoners report “serious psychological distress” (Bronson & Berzofsky, 2017), yet jails and prisons often lack mental health professionals who are trained in psychotherapy. Encouragingly, the small body of forensic e-mental health intervention research available appears promising.
A meta-analysis (Batastini et al., 2016) identified only three empirical between-subjects studies published between 2000 and 2014 specific to e-mental health in correctional settings, and only one (Morgan et al., 2008) focused on psychotherapy intervention. The all-male study, which took place across a general medical center (“hub”) and correctional facility (“remote” site), did not utilize random assignment to treatment conditions (video conference or face-to-face), although the authors noted no marked differences in diagnoses across groups. They found no significant differences in incarcerated individuals’ ratings of working alliance, service engagement, or service satisfaction across conditions. Although this study is an important first step in understanding treatment process, it did not evaluate key outcome variables such as symptom reduction.
Several studies have been published since Batastini et al.’s (2016) meta-analysis, and there are many more pilot and feasibility studies that did not utilize comparison groups or “traditional” correctional samples (see Kip et al., 2018). They have concerned specific treatment populations, such as those in administrative segregation, or specific treatment targets, such as substance use and anger management. We now review these niche interventions.
Administrative Segregation
Following Batastini and colleagues’ (2016) meta-analysis, Batastini and Morgan (2016) compared prison inmates in administrative segregation across an in-person CBT coping skills group (n = 12, limited to two participants per group given administrative issues), a coping skills group conducted via teleconference (n = 24, limited to six participants per group), and a no-treatment control group (n = 13). Participants were primarily diagnosed with substance use (38.5%) or mood-related disorder (26.5%) and had an average of 1.3 years in segregated housing. Given the research context, participation was voluntary and random assignment was not methodologically feasible. However, the authors did not identify significant differences in age, ethnicity, offense type, or diagnostic considerations across groups. Findings showed no significant group differences across symptom severity, criminogenic thinking, client satisfaction, working alliance, and perceptions of the treatment group. This study is quite promising for hard-to-reach, administratively segregated individuals, who report more anxiety and depression relative to individuals in the general-population (Chadick et al., 2018). However, the sample sizes were small, necessitating additional research to explore the efficacy of tele-interventions with this population.
Community Treatment
Technology in the form of electronic monitoring has been an integral part of community corrections for decades (Nellis, 2016); however, more nuanced, treatment-focused approaches to offender reentry are few and far between. Continuum of care is critical for justice-involved individuals with severe and persistent mental illness, and integrated rehabilitation systems should address their complex needs (Pinals & Fuller, 2020). Justice-involved individuals who are released from correctional facilities and reenter rural communities may continue to have significant needs but decreased accessibility to mental health care relative to their suburban and urban counterparts. Forensic e-mental health interventions are potential solutions for treating complex mental health needs and reaching difficult-to-access individuals, such as those who lack transportation, live in rural areas, or are less mobile due to disability or medical vulnerabilities.
One novel program, Sober IPT (i.e., interpersonal psychotherapy for substance use) aimed to reduce substance use upon community reentry by maintaining continuum of care for justice-involved women with major depressive disorder and co-occurring substance use disorders (Johnson et al., 2015). In this study, women who were incarcerated met with an in-person counselor and attended individual and group therapy for eight weeks prior to their release. At reentry, researchers provided the women mobile “sober phones,” which were preprogrammed to only allow calls to sober resources (e.g., their prison counselor, sober friends and family, and Alcoholics Anonymous) and crisis intervention services. Participants then followed up with their counselor via the sober phone for three months to review goals, address substance use triggers, and receive social support. Participants had good treatment contact and reported the sober phone system was helpful. Although there was no control condition in this study and its sample size was small (N = 22), participant feedback allowed the authors to conclude that the continuum of care “pocket case manager” was worthwhile.
Substance Use
Although the evidence bases for forensic-specific e-mental health is quite limited, foundational work on “forensic-adjacent” issues can inform forensic e-mental health practice. Given the high rates of co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders among offender populations, substance use treatment is particularly relevant. E-mental health interventions taking place via Internet modules, text messaging, self-managed applications, and social networking can be effective in reducing alcohol use and its related risk-taking behaviors (O’Rourke et al., 2016). King and colleagues (2009, 2014) used in-person treatment comparison groups to evaluate substance use outcomes of an e-mental health intervention. Treatment adherence, substance use, therapeutic alliance, and client satisfaction were similar across groups, although overall participants reported preferring e-mental health due to its increased accessibility. A meta-analysis of e-mental health interventions for individuals with substance use disorders in remission found, when compared to control groups, approximately 57% of e-mental health interventions had positive effects (Nesvåg & McKay, 2018), and similar effects were found for adults with problem drinking (Riper et al., 2018). In another meta-analysis specific to alcohol use, approximately 88% had positive effects on substance use measures following e-mental health intervention (Fowler et al., 2016). Virtual reality environments have also been used in cue-exposure behavioral therapy to reduce substance use cravings (Hone-Blanchet et al., 2014).
Aggression
The Veterans Affairs (VA) system, the largest integrated health system in the United States, has been a pioneer in videoconferencing mental health services and developed at least 20 e-mental health apps (Gould et al., 2019). Among these, several pertain to coping skills development and anger management. A single group, pre- posttest study of the Remote Exercises for Learning Anger and Excitation Management app demonstrated that following the app intervention, veterans showed decreased anger expression and improvements in social functioning (Morland et al., 2016). In a randomized control trial, the 6-month Cognitive Applications for Life Management (CALM) app intervention (goal setting and planning along with attention training) was associated with significantly decreased self-reported anger (25%) relative to the control group (8% reduction) among veterans with traumatic brain injury and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (Elbogen et al., 2019). Further, collateral contacts reported that CALM participants showed significantly less aggressive behaviors compared to controls. The VA also offers the Veterans Affairs Anger & Irritability Management Skills program (Greene et al., 2014) through online access.
To summarize, forensic e-mental health interventions are in short supply but growing in number. Thus far, only a few studies have examined an intervention’s impact using between-subjects and/or randomized controlled trials, making this area fertile ground for future research prior to wide adaptation in treatment settings.
Research Priorities for Forensic E-Mental Health

A clear implication from this literature review is the sheer lack of empirical research regarding forensic e-mental health. Considering many forensic mental health questions will be similar to general e-health (e.g., symptom reduction and management, social and coping skills development), researchers and practitioners may somewhat generalize that literature’s nominal findings for use with forensic populations. However, forensic and correctional populations are distinct from the general population and the forensic mental health field is frequently tasked with addressing psycho-legal questions which require extensive training and expertise. Thus, it is imperative that researchers do not assume that nonforensic e-mental health research will generalize and, instead, consider the application of technology to this specific subdiscipline. Adding technology to forensic practice without establishing the benefits and understanding the costs could be deleterious. Considering stakeholders’ (criminal justice-involved individuals, treatment providers, corrections professionals, policymakers) needs, cost, and feasibility, we next prioritize key topics that should rise to the top of the forensic e-mental health research agenda.
Validity, Reliability, and Feasibility of Forensic E-Mental Health Evaluations
Arguably, forensic mental health evaluation is the foundation of forensic mental health practice: Evaluation findings are often prominent as an individual proceeds through the criminal justice system and influence how supervisory figures and treatment providers determine which interventions, and to which degrees, are suitable. Thus far, the majority of forensic e-mental health evaluation research has focused on the topic of competence to proceed. This is not surprising, given that upward of 60,000 are conducted each year and the “competency crisis” is a pressing issue (Gowensmith, 2019b; Poythress et al., 2002). But there are additional forensic mental health evaluation domains that warrant research investigation. For example, in the Batastini et al. (2019) survey of forensic mental health evaluators, respondents who had experience with videoconference evaluations endorsed conducting violence risk assessment most frequently, followed by competency to proceed, mental state, child custody, and disability evaluations. Assessments of violence risk and mental state can be much more tedious than in-the-moment competency evaluations, given that they typically require lengthier interviews and, when called for, larger assessment batteries. For mental state evaluations in particular, evaluators may inquire about minute details that could be frustrating to seek and answer in the context of video conferencing. Put simply, they most often will require more time and effort than evaluations of competency and may not be the most appropriate for videoconference. Given that practitioners are conducting these evaluations, psycho-legal referral questions aside from competency to proceed are important research avenues to follow.
Although we can extrapolate many of the more general videoconferencing literature to forensic contexts, researchers should further examine remote administration of forensic assessment and forensic-relevant instruments, as have researchers studying neuropsychological test administration via videoconference (Brearly et al., 2017). Forensic researchers should focus on the most commonly conducted measures as identified by practitioners, such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), Personality Assessment Inventory, Historical Clinical Risk Management-20 (Douglas et al., 2013), and standardized adjudicative competence measures (Archer et al., 2006; Neal & Grisso, 2014). Several of these measures, such as the MMPI and PAI, are already available via online platforms. They can be administered remotely and securely via screen-sharing technology. Stimuli presentation can be standardized on screen to a significant degree (albeit an examinee’s setting can potentially interfere with administration). But clinician-administered tests, including many critical response style measures (e.g., Miller Forensic Assessment of Symptoms Test, Structured Interview of Reported Symptoms, Test of Memory Malingering), allow more room for error given individual differences in administration. Arguably, response style measures have a greater applied range compared to referral-specific (e.g., competency, violence risk) measures and should be situated high on the research agenda, given that assessment of response style is imperative across all forensic evaluation contexts (Rogers & Bender, 2020).
Another important area to explore is whether video recording of an evaluation impacts response style. There are benefits and risks to this practice. On one hand, video creates a more complete examination record, can help resolve later confusions or disputes, and refresh forensic evaluators’ memories when drawing clinical opinions and preparing for trial (Siegel et al., 2018; Zonana et al., 1999). On the other, the process of video recording may impact evaluation dynamics and performance (Otto & Krauss, 2009). Nevertheless, some policymakers have moved forward with certain video recording requirements (e.g., Colorado Code of Criminal Procedure, 2017). A survey of evaluators practicing in Colorado indicated that they generally opposed recording evaluations due to technical challenges, confidentiality concerns, potential misuse, and invalidation of the evaluation (Potts et al., 2018). Before coming to conclusions on this issue, researchers should understand whether video recording produces differing results.
An additional area ripe for research concerns the application of forensic e-mental health with linguistically and culturally diverse populations. Over the last several decades global migration has increased such that the U.S. Census Bureau postulated that immigration will fuel population level demographic changes in the United States (Vespa et al., 2020). Reflecting these immigration trends, approximately 21% of the entire U.S. population speak a language other than English in the home (U.S. Census Bureau, 2020). It is reasonable then, that interpreters are commonly used in forensic practice (Weiss & Rosenfeld, 2012). Despite this, very little research has addressed the impact of language interpretation in forensic evaluation, and these samples were drawn from populations with relatively diverse demographics (Kois et al., 2013; Paradis et al., 2016; Varela et al., 2011) Researchers can consider the impact of in vivo versus remote interpretation services, as well as baseline accuracy rates for language interpretation. This work is particularly important to ensure reliable and valid exchange of information and ultimately inform best practice as the population continues to diversify.
Somewhat relatedly, researchers should consider the feasibility of forensic e-mental health evaluations with diverse populations. For example, older adults are less likely to report comfort with digital devices and adults living with a physical impairment are less likely to use the Internet than those without such impairment (Gitlow, 2014; Zickuhr & Smith, 2013). Further, across the United States there are severe disparities in Internet accessibility, with lower income and rural populations less likely to have consistent access (Pew Research Center, 2019; U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). Researchers should consider if accommodations are appropriate for individuals participating in forensic e-mental health evaluations who experience discomfort with technology and/or the Internet due to unfamiliarity. If any accommodations are implemented, it is imperative to understand how they affect the validity of the evaluation.
Technology-Facilitated Interventions
Competence Restoration
For the last decade, high rates of competency referrals, forensic mental health staff shortages, and various administrative issues have contributed to the length of time defendants await competency evaluation and/or restoration (Gowensmith, 2019b). There is a dearth of research on restoration in general (Heilbrun et al., 2019), but restoration facilitated by technology could be an efficient practice by broadcasting restoration instructors to difficult-to-reach defendants (e.g., in rural jails or in the community) or those in understaffed facilities. Another benefit of conducting restoration via asynchronous e-means could ensure that defendants new to competence restoration receive psycho-legal instruction in a scaffolded and organized manner, rather than joining a group on a revolving basis. E-administration of competence restoration protocol could also be beneficial for defendants who have special cognitive or language needs (Casas & Leany, 2017). Given that a videoconference approach could reach diverse defendants, it lends itself to outcomes that are more generalizable and research using video modules could enhance fidelity for standardized competency restoration protocols.
Cognitive remediation could be an effective tool for individuals undergoing competence to proceed restoration, who are most often diagnosed with psychotic disorders (Pirelli & Zapf, 2020). There are nuanced neurocognitive components to the competency to proceed criteria outlined in the seminal Dusky v. United States (1960) decision: specifically, attention, working memory, and executive functioning. Research indicates that cognitive remediation, typically conducted via computer programs, can improve these functions among individuals with severe and persistent mental illness (Chan et al., 2015; Medalia et al., 2001; Medalia & Richardson, 2005; Medalia & Saperstein, 2013). It follows that cognitive remediation could also improve neurocognitive functioning among defendants opined incompetent to proceed. This assertion is supported by forensic mental health and neuropsychology theory (Schwalbe & Medalia, 2007; Zapf, 2013), as well as a small pilot study that revealed cognitive remediation can improve Dusky reasoning abilities, particularly among individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia (Wilson, 2015).
Community Treatment
As observed by Leifman and Coffey (2015) “. . . one look at ‘treatment as usual’ in many communities would suggest that our typical practice of mental health interventions in criminal justice settings has remained stagnant for decade.” (p. 201). Community interventions in particular fit directly into an exciting “space” for forensic e-mental health research to flourish. Technology, which can be programmed to vary the level of supervision and intervention intensity and frequency, is an opportunity to match an offender’s specific needs to their appropriate level of supervisory and clinical contact. A recent National Institute of Justice collaboration between the RAND Corporation and the University of Denver focused specifically on how stakeholders can use technology to improve community supervision (Russo et al., 2019). Participants identified benefits for individuals under supervision (electronic “check-ins,” automated appearance reminders, positive reinforcement for prosocial behavior), as well as benefits for supervisors themselves (automated reminders for appearance dates and workloads, interactive resources that prompt officers about specific issues to address with offenders). They prioritized a research agenda: How best to hold individuals under supervision accountable via technology? Are virtual check-ins effective at reducing failed appearances and other compliance matters? Which populations are most amenable to e-supervision, and how long should e-monitoring occur? Participants noted that mobile data could lend to validation of “homegrown” risk measures, data mining, and machine learning to identify which interventions and timings are most effective. Ideas such as these can serve as beginning points for researchers interested in community intervention.
Forensic e-mental health applies not just to offenders reentering the community, but also individuals followed by assisted outpatient treatment, drug and mental health diversion courts, and other treatment-intensive community programs. To maintain treatment gains among general (nonforensic) samples, individuals exiting inpatient or residential substance use treatment should have continued care for an average of 3 to 6 months (Proctor & Herschman, 2014). Interventions and social support administered via mobile application increases accessibility, and ultimately continuum of care. Recognizing this, the Veterans Health Administration began giving video-enabled tablets with data plans to treatment-seeking individuals who faced barriers to care, such as poor health, lack of transportation, or rural setting (Jacobs et al., 2019). In a retrospective comparison study, Jacobs and colleagues found that the tablet program was associated with improved continuum of care: increased psychotherapy sessions, stronger medication adherence, and fewer missed appointments in general. A second study found that veterans were equally divided in preferring treatment via the tablet program, preferring treatment in-person, or having no preference (Slightam et al., 2020). Despite these promising findings, both studies involved veterans and it is unknown if the beneficial effects of technology application generalize to the forensic population receiving treatment while being monitored in the community. If research establishes similarly positive outcomes with a community-dwelling forensic population, subsequent economic and public health benefits could be consequential.
An additional research priority concerns treatment attrition. Treatment drop-out among forensic populations is a major concern as drop-out can have direct impact on mental health functioning as well as indirect legal impact for individuals under mandated treatment or supervision. In fact, one meta-analysis of 114 treatment programs found that violent offenders who began but did not complete mental health treatment were 10% to 23% more likely to recidivate (general, violent, or nonviolent) compared to treatment completers (Olver et al., 2011). These findings held regardless of treatment context (institutional or community-based), although community-dwelling individuals who terminated treatment early were most likely to recidivate. The research indicated that psychotic and personality disorder diagnoses, as well as negative treatment attitudes and behaviors, predicted dropout; however, the interventions neither necessarily targeted treatment engagement nor did they involve e-mental health. CBT-informed anger management intervention attrition was also associated with recidivism in a meta-analysis by Henwood et al. (2015). As such, targeting mental illness and motivation through mobile interventions could increase treatment completion, which could indirectly lead to decreased recidivism rates. Specific to offenders with severe and mental illness, research indicates that timely mental health treatment reduces the likelihood of criminal justice involvement (Constantine et al., 2012). Killikelly et al. (2017), in their systematic review of treatment adherence among individuals with psychosis, found that overall, 83% of participants adhered to web-based and app treatment. Although mobile technology may be promising with this treatment group, interventions should go above and beyond treatment linkage and completion, and address criminogenic as well as service needs in order to maximize results (Epperson et al., 2014; Skeem et al., 2014).
Regarding specific psychotherapeutic orientations, cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) has garnered a strong track record with respect to treating justice-involved persons (Antonio & Crossett, 2017; Harrison et al., 2020; Higgs et al., 2018; Mpofu et al., 2018; Olver et al., 2020; Yoon et al., 2017). The Drexel Reentry Project (DRP) developed to address the needs of moderate- to high-risk justice-involved persons at community reentry, uses CBT principles in its multistep program (Heilbrun et al., 2017). Of note, DRP (2020) moved to telehealth in the context of COVID. Data collected from the program’s new treatment approach could make exciting contributions to our understanding of forensic e-mental health with justice-involved individuals under supervision.
Substance Use
Substance use intervention is an urgent priority, particularly in the context of the opioid epidemic (Gostin et al., 2017). It is regularly associated with decreased recidivism in addition to decreased relapse (Moore et al., 2018). Probationers with co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders are more likely to recidivate compared to probationers with substance use or mental health problems (Balyakina et al., 2014). A meta-analysis of substance use and mental health reentry programs found that access to social support and housing and continuity of caseworker relationships pre- and postrelease were predictors of success (Kendall et al., 2018). Another study found that lack of social support was associated with substance use, specifically overdose, among people released from prison (Binswanger et al., 2012). Potentially, CBT and social support facilitated by mobile apps or other e-means could serve as a protective factor against substance use. Kramer Schmidt et al. (2018), who meta-analyzed literature on psychosocial interventions for alcohol use disorder, found that research assessing frequency, rather than intended or actual treatment duration, was associated with abstinence and lighter drinking. Frequent mobile “check-in” assessments could have a similar effect. Thus far, few substance use interventions have taken a “tech” approach with justice-involved persons.
As of yet, no forensic e-mental health intervention has met the rigor of evidence-based evaluation, let alone one for community-dwelling individuals. A. Batastini (personal communication, April 28, 2020) is extending this line of work by developing an e-therapy app for justice-involved persons in the community. The project is in its developmental stages, with a patent application pending.
Policy Directions

Although there is relatively little research on forensic e-mental health, it is nevertheless moving forward. COVID-19 caught much of the field by surprise and practitioners, researchers, and policymakers had to make rapid decisions about how their work should proceed. We find that the time has come to consider implementation of forensic e-mental health on a larger scale, and are firm in the belief that it is far better to be proactive, rather than reactive, in advancing research so that we may best adapt our practice. At the same time, we acknowledge the relative dearth of research necessitates caution when implementing policies without careful consideration of the legal and ethical consequences of embracing forensic e-mental health. The following policy considerations are offered.
Need for Professional Consensus
When the United States began to feel the major effects of COVID-19, psychologists looked to professional organizations, colleagues, test developers, technology experts, and literature on conducting work via e-means. The APA referred its community to its preexisting General Practice Guidelines for Telepsychology (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013) and provided resources for teaching and research using technology. Subspecialty professional groups have contributed more specific practice recommendations (e.g., the Inter Organizational Practice Committee, comprising members of the American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology (AACN), Division 40 of the APA, the National Academy of Neuropsychology (NAN), the American Board of Professional Neuropsychology (ABN), and the American Psychological Association Services). The American Psychology-Law Society (AP-LS) and the American Board of Forensic Psychology have not yet produced official positions on the use of technology in psychology-law clinical practice. Encouragingly, AP-LS has developed a telehealth task force (J. Groscup, personal communication, May 8, 2020) to develop and promulgate guidelines for the field. Technology is rapidly changing, more quickly than guidelines can be offered by professional organizations (Vitacco et al., 2018). Future guidelines should be broad to allow for extrapolation to newly developed technologies.
Implementing Forensic E-Mental Health
The great task of implementing a new forensic e-mental health system can appear overwhelming, if not daunting. Transitions can actually take place quite quickly: Yellowlees et al. (2020) described how, within 3 days, the University of California–Davis Health System transitioned to 100% telepsychiatry practice at the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis. Fortunately, numerous colleagues have published guidance on how to build and sustain these infrastructures (Hilty et al., 2015; Hilty et al., 2016; Luxton & Niemi, 2019; Smith et al., 2020). To begin, stakeholders, needs, and target populations must be identified. An “e-health Readiness Assessment” will help stakeholders plan project goals (e.g., is the purpose to conduct intake assessments, psychotherapy, emergency care, and/or research? What technology resources are already in place, and are they sufficient? What are our cultural and linguistic needs? What disparities can we anticipate?). Funding should be secured to adequately cover the costs of providing services (direct and indirect costs including technology, staff, and supporting materials), reimbursement protocol (when relevant) and continuity of care should be coordinated. Cost sharing across agencies or institutions (clinics, hospitals, corrections, the courts) should be preagreed upon, particularly given the fiscal complexities of federal, state, and county budgets. Technology should be specified with encryption networks. All professionals involved should be trained in e-mental health and the system’s supervisory and crisis protocols (e.g., what is the chain of command within and across institutions?). Careful documentation of challenges along the way should be part of a feedback loop used to continually improve infrastructure and practice. A review by Edge et al. (2019) is an especially valuable resource for those interested in implementation barriers to forensic e-mental health. “Case studies” on the many ways forensic e-mental health may be implemented are also available (see Batastini et al., 2020; Farabee et al., 2016; Kaftarian, 2019; Luxton & Lexcen, 2018; Magaletta et al., 2000; Miller et al., 2008).
Traditional mental health care models will need to be adapted. Integrated care can be facilitated by tele-teaming, that is, communication among virtual treatment teams via synchronous or asynchronous electronic means (Waugh et al., 2015). Tele-teaming is well-suited for forensic mental health treatment providers, which can involve groups composed of psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, primary care providers, probation officers or other community supervision professionals, and so on (Cuddeback et al., 2020; Parker et al., 2018). Tele-teaming models include multiperson treatments/therapies, facility-based-settings, where a remote individual of a specific discipline reaches out to a “home base” onsite mental health facility, and primary care models. In their scoping review, Parker et al. (2018) identified 12 team models that addressed forensic mental health, including interdisciplinary teams collaborating on prearrest, postbooking, and jail diversion; co-responding (law enforcement and mental health professionals address acute mental health crises simultaneously), information sharing agreements (e.g., sex offender registries), and reentry programs. Parker and colleagues’ review showed rich opportunity for adopting technology across these many aspects of forensic mental health. In the future, we may see a move away from using technology to mimic in-person care, and increased use of artificial intelligence, robotics, metrics and data mining, mobile apps, and virtual reality (Shore, 2019) in workflow and treatment configurations.
As noted by Batastini et al. (2018), joint ventures between academic and community-based collaborators as resources can be helpful in implementing forensic e-mental health. There could be mutual needs across the university and forensic mental health community. Academic centers typically have strong information technology infrastructure and their research missions often involve meeting the needs of local communities; therefore, e-mental health, particularly for underserved populations such as individuals in the forensic realm, could fit nicely into their research agendas (Caudill & Sager, 2015). The University of Washington (UW) has implemented academic-community based partnerships specific to psychiatric e-mental health (Kimmel et al., 2019) and a forensic teaching service (Piel et al., 2019). In fact, following the landmark Trueblood v. State of Washington Department of Human and Social Services (2015), the 2016 Washington State Legislature directed UW, the state’s Department of Social and health Services, and state psychiatric hospital to develop a forensic teaching service with the goal of facilitating forensic psychiatry services in particular. In Texas, the University of Texas Medical Branch and Texas Tech University Health Services provide all psychiatric services via e-mental health for individuals incarcerated by the Texas Department of Criminal Justice (Raimer & Stobo, 2004). University-based forensic clinics simultaneously provide valuable training experience and contribution to the community (Heilbrun et al., 2013). A book on the ways universities can collaborate with criminal justice programming is forthcoming (Heilbrun et al., in press).
There are others’ “lessons learned” that should be considered prior to embarking on new forensic e-mental health endeavors. In their reflection on the development of a psychiatry e-mental health program, Ulzen et al. (2013) delineated the successes and challenges of their collaboration between the University of Alabama School of Medicine–Tuscaloosa and a local nonprofit mental health clinic. For example, there may be unanticipated changes in leadership or institutional directions, which both have the potential to derail the e-mental health service agenda. The authors emphasized that enthusiasm and project advocacy was critical. In the earlier period of their collaboration, Alabama law indicated that to bill for services, a physician must be present at the hub and the remote site—which essentially negates the efficiency and cost savings of e-mental health. The group lobbied state legislature, and a new law was passed that allowed for billing if at least one Medicaid-eligible provider is present at the remote site.
Training and Education
Psychology-law is a fast-growing area of clinical expertise, which can require training and education in assessment, intervention, and research across a range of settings (DeMatteo et al., 2019). Magaletta et al. (2013) surveyed 170 APA-accredited psychology doctoral programs and found that 111 (65%) offered experience in corrections, and a follow-up study showed that intervention comprised the majority of corrections practicum experience (Magaletta et al., 2017). The number of predoctoral psychology internships with correctional or forensic components have tripled over the last decade (Malesky & Croysdale, 2009; Potts et al., 2020). Forensic e-mental health provides a novel avenue for training and supervising students interested in this career trajectory. For example, trainees and supervisors can remotely coconduct forensic evaluations via three-way videoconference (M. A. Conroy, personal communication, May 15, 2020) and remote live supervision (i.e., the “bug in the ear” method of supervision) has long been an option (Rousmaniere, 2014). Interested readers can refer to McCord et al. (2015), who detailed their training protocol specific to counseling psychology doctoral students at Texas A&M University’s Telehealth Counseling Clinic. Psychiatry colleagues (Saeed et al., 2017) have also provided 12 guidelines for graduate medical education in telepsychiatry, including awareness of the remote location’s resources (e.g., local emergency room and coordinated care colleagues), understanding the laws and ethics related to e-mental health, recognizing when e-mental health practice is appropriate for a particular client, and considering issues of test integrity.
Of course, training and education do not conclude with graduation. The University of New Mexico School of Medicine’s Law and Mental Health Lecture Series has offered free, weekly, 1-hr continuing education (CE) credit sessions since 2018 on psychology-law topics via Zoom videoconference and plans to continue this opportunity indefinitely (J. Brovko, personal communication, May 8, 2020). This is a generous online service afforded to the forensic practitioner community and serves as a model that can be replicated by other academic, clinical, and correctional institutions throughout the country. The Standards and Criteria for Approval of Sponsors of Continuing Education for Psychologists (APA, 2015) indicates that there are no fees for offering and granting CE credits; rather, CE “sponsors” must meet criteria outlined therein (see https://www.apa.org/about/policy/approval-standards.pdf). For practitioners in search of in-depth training on forensic topics, ConceptCE at Palo Alto University (https://concept.paloaltou.edu/) offers a host of synchronous and asynchronous continuing education training opportunities, ranging from one to 60-hr CE courses.
Make Data Accessible for Researchers and Policymakers
A remarkable benefit of e-mental health is that in many cases, data can be automatically populated into electronic records and exported for statistical analyses. This offers exciting prospects for research across the sequential intercept model, that is, the many points individuals may enter or delve deeper into the criminal justice system and their opportunities for intervention (Munetz & Griffin, 2006). At the individual-evaluator level, several sources recommend evaluators track referral sources, case characteristics, and penultimate psycho-legal opinions in a personal database (Dror & Murrie, 2018; Gowensmith & McCallum, 2019; Guarnera et al., 2017). Gowensmith (2019a) expanded this idea when developing the mobile phone application called Case Rate (www.caserate.org), in which evaluators can input a variety of variables, calculate caseload-wide descriptive statistics, and compare their own case details to colleagues’ through its crowd-sourced data function. The app simplifies database maintenance given its mobile accessibility and is a novel usage of technology for data procurement, storage, and sharing, as well as monitoring potential evaluation biases.
While criminal justice has a number of nationwide databases housing policing, correctional, and victimization statistics, there is little available specific to forensic mental health aside from specialty court data. We advocate for the development of forensic-specific electronic databases, developed for quality assurance and improvement rather than for specific research projects. This effort has been in place at the University of Virginia via its long-standing Forensic Evaluation Information System (Murrie et al., 2020; Warren et al., 1991) and more recent Custom Application Consulting Service (CACS; Warren, 2018). CACS consists of case management software specific to juvenile adjudicative competence. The paperless system allows for analysis of real-time service delivery data, calendar alerts for impending court deadlines, a streamlined progress note system, a searchable database for finding case-relevant data, management of billing and program costs, and production of administrative summary reports. Like Case Rate, CACS is moving toward a mobile phone app interface (Kois et al., 2019). More recent efforts include Quality Assurance and Quality Improvement databases such as the Alabama Forensic Assessment and Research Evaluation Project (Alabama FARE, Kois & Cox, 2020) and the patient research database at Massachusetts’ Bridgewater State Hospital (Fairfax-Columbo et al., 2020). These state-level projects are encouraging; however, bringing together national data through organized means will help us better understand epidemiology of mental health and criminogenic factors among forensic populations, as well as how to mitigate these factors.
Researchers and policymakers should understand issues around confidentiality and privacy prior to data-sharing, as various entities (e.g., law enforcement, vs. corrections, vs. forensic hospitals) have very different HIPAA obligations (Petrila et al., 2015). Further, prior to practicing any form of e-mental health which includes the collection of client data, governing bodies should clearly outline data sharing and storage requirements. This includes directions for practitioners and researchers regarding efforts to protect against cyber-security attacks. It is promising that many licensing boards and professional organizations (e.g., APA) already offer guidance on data protection within cyberinfrastructure. However, considering technology and its application to the mental health field is constantly evolving, policymakers should remain diligent in updating data security recommendations and requirements.
Barriers
Implementing forensic e-mental health is easier said than done. The initial and most crucial hurdle is obtaining stakeholder buy-in. Although research consistently shows that e-mental health consumers perceive it as acceptable and feasible, practitioners tend to rate lower overall satisfaction with e-mental health relative to in-person format. A survey of substance use treatment providers found that nearly half were concerned that their staff would not accept the implementation of e-mental health use through mobile apps, phone, text message, instant message, videoconference, or web-based modules, but suspected that only one fifth of clients would not accept these e-interventions (Faragher et al., 2018). In their study of videoconference MacCAT-CA administration, Manguno-Mire et al. (2007) found that practitioners reported technological difficulties (i.e., wifi connectivity, audio/verbal lag, poor feedback, and audiovisual quality) as the most problematic issues. A survey of forensic practitioners noted ethical and legal concerns along with limitations in conducting psychological assessments via videoconference as most problematic (Batastini et al., 2019).
If and when the time comes, large scale implementation of forensic e-mental health will require a significant culture shift within the scientific and clinical fields, as well as within institutions (i.e., psychiatric hospitals, correctional facilities, community supervision offices) that are, historically, slow to evolve. Eventual forensic e-mental health implementation will also require the support of state and local legislators who allocate funds for community mental health and correctional services. For institutions and organizations, forensic e-mental health would require significant upfront costs, which will take time to recoup. For example, Rappaport et al. (2018) examined the cost-savings of implementing telehealth (with a focus on primary and emergent care) throughout Maryland’s Department of Corrections and found that it took approximately 32 months for the program to regain its initial investment ($1.2 million). Despite this, there are reports of programs and institutions that have successfully lobbied for this support. For example, the mental health court/jail diversion system between Rikers Island and New York City Diversion Courts conducts virtually all violence risk assessments via videoconference (M. Rotter, personal communication, April 28, 2020). Of note, W. N. Gowensmith and D. Murrie (personal communication, May 9, 2020) reported that colleagues from Colorado’s Office of Behavioral Health secured funds for videoconference technology (including video-enabled mobile phones) for Colorado defendants undergoing inpatient and outpatient restoration in the context of COVID-19.
We acknowledge forensic institutions are grossly under resourced and underfunded (Pinals, 2014), and the downward trajectory of funding for public mental health resources is unlikely to rebound given the near global economic devastation associated with COVID-19. We acknowledge financially struggling systems may have difficulty implementing programs requiring substantial upfront costs, particularly without assistance from local, state, and federal governments. Further, the cost-effectiveness of e-mental health programs is variable (Lal & Adair, 2014) and largely depends on the quality and extensiveness of implementation. When considering these financial barriers, institutions should consider whether the result justifies the (costly) means and what e-mental health program will be most efficacious given the priorities of the unit and the population being served.
For practitioners working outside of a government funded system, the length of time needed to recoup the initial costs may be infeasible. Perhaps not surprisingly, practitioners have reported reimbursement as a reason for not adopting e-mental health in the past (Faragher et al., 2018). It is possible these practitioners may find value in “teaming up” with other practitioners to share initial costs, as some do when buying materials and renting space for independent practice. Despite the initial financial considerations, within a short period of time, forensic e-mental health can result in quantifiable, organizational-level cost saving, as well as less tangible improvement in public safety (Rappaport et al., 2018).
A number of ethical considerations should be noted. It is critical to determine whether e-mental health is appropriate on an individual case basis, that is, according to the practitioner’s skill and the validity and reliability of the technology-assisted technique as applied to a given examinee (APA, 2013, 2017). Practitioners should reference relevant ethical codes to guide this decision-making process. During this unprecedented pandemic, emergency services are acceptable and encouraged; however, moving forward, it is imperative that advancements in practice and policy are proactive, evidence-based, and intentional rather than reactive.
A final consideration is the differential access to the technological resources necessary for implementation. Recently highlighted by many school systems’ sudden transition to online education due to COVID-19 (Hall et al., 2020), across the country differential access to reliable Internet and digital devices exacerbates preexisting gaps between socioeconomic classes and largely impacts people of color and rural communities (Pew Research Center, 2019). If the cost of participation in forensic e-mental health is placed largely on the consumer, it is possible financial barriers could subsequently impair treatment performance. Relatedly, forensic e-mental health may not be appropriate for certain populations, such as older adults who may be less tech-savvy. As the field increasingly adopts this approach, it is imperative that policymakers, researchers, and clinicians consider accessibility and affordability (see Luxton et al., 2016).
Conclusion

Thus far, forensic psychology falls steps behind the technological advancements of our medical, psychiatry, and counseling psychology colleagues. Research to date is largely focused on forensic e-mental health evaluation, specifically competency to proceed, and correctional interventions. There is ample opportunity to explore how technology can improve other evaluation and intervention practices. The world of technology is too vast for one article to cover every technological innovation that could be applied to forensic mental health. We did not report every study, nor did we address every area of forensic e-mental health that could benefit from technological means. Rather than a systematic review, this article is a beginning point for forensic mental health practitioners, researchers, and policymakers to gain exposure to which technologies are available, their evidence base, and what they may expect in the future.
Necessity is the mother of invention. The COVID-19 pandemic presented unexpected changes to forensic mental health practice, research, and policy; however, it also has allowed for unparalleled advancements in how the forensic mental health field can leverage technology. Given its ease, accessibility, and widespread use during COVID-19, it is likely that forensic e-mental health will persist in many practice, research, and policy contexts once there is a (relative) “return to normal.” It is our hope that the COVID-19-necessaitated technology zeitgeist provides impetus for exciting innovations in the field of forensic psychology.",
"4": "Anxiety and depressive disorders are among the most common and impairing mental illnesses in the United States (World Health Organization [WHO], 2017)], and emerging research suggests the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated anxiety, traumatic stress, and depression symptomatology (Liang et al., 2020; Lopes & Jaspal, 2020), indicating a significant increase of mental illness risk with important public health implications. Additionally, many authors voiced concerns regarding the virus’ widening of extant healthcare disparities (Summers-Gabr, 2020) and disproportionate impact on specific populations such as frontline workers with greater virus exposure (Ruiz & Gibson, 2020). Notably, social distancing guidelines, including guidance to wear face coverings, disinfectant procedures, and general fear among both clients and providers, present significant barriers to care from practical, economic, health, and personal comfort perspectives. Despite these barriers, digital connectedness continues to grow with over 95% of Americans owning a cellphone, 81% owning a smartphone (Taylor & Silver, 2019), and 66% owning at least two digital devices (i.e., smartphone, desktop, laptop, or tablet; Anderson, 2020). Furthermore, while public Internet access is nearly ubiquitous today (e.g., free Wi-Fi at coffee shops), the Pew Research Center reported 75% of U.S. adults also have broadband Internet service at home (Taylor and Silver, 2019), suggesting fast, reliable, and more secure connectivity that provides a unique opportunity to leverage telepsychology to address mental health needs.
Telepsychology is defined as “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies… [including, but not limited] to telephone, mobile devices, interactive videoconferencing, email, chat, text, and Internet” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013). Telepsychology can decrease barriers to care and increase access to evidence-based treatments, especially for clients in underserved areas (e.g., rural communities with few to no providers; Correll et al., 2011), as well as those who lack reliable transportation to treatment clinics or hospitals. Telepsychology addresses these barriers by bringing mental health treatment to the client (i.e., via computer, tablet, or phone) in either the client’s home or a healthcare facility (Martin et al., 2020).
Myriad studies conclude telepsychology via video conferencing yields comparable to greater outcomes compared to in-person services and is well-received by clients (e.g., Morgan et al., 2008). Telepsychology services are associated with improved clinical outcomes compared to no treatment including for those mental health conditions expected to rise during the COVID-19 pandemic such as anxiety (e.g., Varker et al., 2019), traumatic stress (e.g., Morland et al., 2020), and depression (e.g., Andrews et al., 2018). Additionally, telepsychology via videoconferencing (e.g., Simpson & Reid, 2014) and via telephone (e.g., Lingely-Pottie & McGrath, 2006) is associated with strong therapeutic alliances and increased cost-effectiveness, lowering costs by 10% per patient and 16% per visit compared to face-to-face treatment (O’Reilly et al., 2007).
While use of telepsychology methods increased over recent years in both community (e.g., Contreras et al., 2018) and federal agencies such as the Veterans Health Administration (VHA; e.g., Chen et al., 2019), university training clinics largely refrained from shifting to telepsychology with only a limited number of graduate training programs incorporating telepsychology into their curricula prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., Perle et al., 2012). Despite this, university training clinics are uniquely postured to provide low-cost, evidence-based mental health services to their communities in this time of crisis. In response to COVID-19’s initial outbreak in the United States, 86% of training clinics that remained open in March 2020 reported transitioning, or making plans to transition, to telepsychology by May 2020 (Hames et al., 2020). These rapid shifts to telepsychology are necessary; however, trainees and supervisors alike may have little experience or training with telepsychology. In fact, despite the increased use of telepsychology among clinicians, there is a lack of adequate preparation and training in telepsychology at all clinical psychology practitioner levels (Glueckauf et al., 2018). This underscores the need for additional guidance to training clinics shifting from in-person services to telepsychology. A review of telepsychology’s specific ethical and legal implications are discussed elsewhere (e.g., Barnwell, 2019; Cooper et al., 2019), thus this commentary will offer student-perspectives and practical suggestions for university training clinics adapting to meet the behavioral health needs of their communities, as well as the training needs of doctoral students, brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, such guidance may be additionally useful to clinics facing future local or national crises.
As the student leaders of our university’s scientist-practitioner training clinic, we recognize our challenges are likely not unique and wish to share recommendations to assist other programs with increasing trainee and supervisory competence in telepsychology during this unprecedented time. We provide this guidance in the form of five considerations followed by five specific curricula recommendations. We then incorporate these recommendations into a four-session workshop led by clinic leadership. While these guidelines were conceptualized in response to the present pandemic, we hope training clinics will permanently expand clinical curricula and training to include telepsychology as we believe this modality offers a unique way to decrease barriers to care and expand access to evidence based services. Additionally, while we hope these recommendations may be useful to clinics world-wide, we acknowledge the focus on university clinics located in the United States.
Considerations for the Transition to Telepsychology

Survey Stakeholders
We encourage departments to survey students, supervisors, faculty, and staff on their familiarity or training with telepsychology, their perceived requirements for a smooth transition (e.g., specific training, new policies, additional supervision), and any concerns they foresee or have encountered in other clinics. We also encourage departments to hold informal focus groups for dialogue and problem-solving as concerns arise. Discussing the transition to telepsychology in the context of upholding the training clinic’s mission and honoring student, supervisor, faculty, and staff values may help develop stakeholder consensus regarding the transition plan, mission, training competencies, and expectations. Those with relationships at other agencies more versed in telepsychology (e.g., VHA) may be helpful consultants. It is advisable to provide students and supervisors opportunities to discuss what works or does not work well in other psychology practicum settings to better inform university training clinic policies.
Importantly, given the uniqueness of graduate student training clinics, trainees are often in multiple roles including student, researcher, psychotherapist, umbrella supervisor (where a pre-doctoral or post-doctoral trainee supervises another more novice trainee under the supervision of a licensed psychologist), and supervisee. These roles are often associated with power imbalances; it is imperative that clinic staff anonymously survey students to explicitly solicit their feedback and concerns. Many students might not otherwise voice their thoughts and opinions due to concerns about appearing incompetent or risking a negative impact on their academic career due to low grades or unfavorable supervisor ratings (Hess et al., 2008).
Furthermore, students may experience personal barriers to the provision of telepsychology. For example, students often live with partners or roommates in one-bedroom or studio apartments where conducting telepsychology in a private environment may mean providing sessions while sitting on the floor of a bathroom or closet. Clinic directors should survey and routinely check in with students to determine work settings at home and discuss techniques to improve the telepsychology experience. By extension, such anonymous surveys may also be beneficial to solicit honest feedback from supervisors, faculty, and staff. This feedback may aid in improving clinic policies and operations to benefit psychotherapists, supervisors, and clients.
Identify Logistical Needs and Concerns
Identifying logistical needs and concerns may prove the most daunting task in beginning the transition from in-person to telepsychology practice, and may be significantly limited by the clinic and/or department budget and internal resources. A number of telepsychology platforms have free, albeit less comprehensive, versions (e.g., https://doxy.me) and free secure email is also available (e.g., https://protonmail.com). We encourage clinics to consider long-term goals when choosing a platform; while many non-HIPAA compliant/compatible platforms were approved during the COVID-19 pandemic, many still pose significant security risks and are likely to present continued limitations moving forward. Thus, we believe it is critical to ensure current practices meet HIPAA security standards from the outset, even during this pandemic-driven time of loosened restrictions. Doing so will ensure clinics can continue providing telepsychology even after pandemic restrictions are lifted. Further, training students to use telepsychology effectively will promote greater comfort and competency, thereby increasing the likelihood of using telepsychology in the future when beneficial for clients (e.g., Maheu et al., 2018; McCord et al., 2015). Increasing competency in telepsychology for all clinicians is important for addressing barriers to care and reaching high-risk, high-need populations unable to access in-person therapeutic services (e.g., Domino et al., 2019).
Telepsychology platform considerations should also address routine operations and ensure accessibility (e.g., able to be accessed from a phone without internet) for the community the clinic serves, especially those that are low-resourced. Clinics should also stay up to date on resources disseminated within their communities in response to the pandemic (e.g., free internet/hotspots) that may address patient barriers to care. Clinics may find it helpful to create trial accounts on multiple platforms to test them out between psychotherapists and solicit feedback. Furthermore, clinics must consider possible changes to documentation and recording protocols such as by transitioning to an electronic medical record (EMR) system, mandating use of virtual private networks (VPNs) and secure University-based cloud-systems, and shifting to in vivo supervision wherein the supervisor joins the telepsychology session to avoid the necessity for audio or video recording. Additional resources on telepsychology platforms and other logistical concerns are available through the Telebehavioral Health Institute (https://telehealth.org/), the Telehealth Certification Institute (https://telementalhealthtraining.com/), and the American Telemedicine Association (https://www.americantelemed.org/).
Develop Ethical and Legal Language
We encourage departments to read and discuss the eight telepsychology guidelines developed by the APA Task Force (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013) and revise clinic policies and procedures accordingly. Furthermore, clinics ought to consider the APA ethics code (American Psychological Association, 2017) and review the unique ethical issues that may arise in response to providing care during the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., maintaining privacy while working from home; Chenneville & Schwartz-Mette, 2020). Clinics may find it helpful to discuss policy revisions, paperwork, platform business association agreements (BAA), and concerns with university lawyers. Clinic personnel may also find it helpful to collaborate with information technology personnel to address any technological difficulties as they arise, such as maintaining privacy over video servers.
Develop Training Content
Departments may consider providing an additional course on telepsychology or plan to revise existing course syllabi to include new material related to telepsychology. We recommend including, at minimum, the following five topic areas: logistics, ethical and legal considerations, clinical assessment (within a therapeutic context), psychotherapy, and supervision. Additional thoughts regarding course topics are offered in the following section. In addition to providing this additional course content, we also suggest, at minimum, developing a four-session workshop primer to ensure trainees and supervisors alike have a baseline familiarity with telepsychology and the associated clinic policies and procedures commencing telepsychology services. Additional details regarding this workshop are provided below.
Quality Improvement
Developing competence in any emerging practice area requires ongoing evaluation, creativity, and flexibility. A scientific and evidence based approach is best and will ensure quality review and continued improvement (Levine et al., 2017). We encourage clinics to develop and implement quality monitoring tools at each clinic level from the client to the clinic director. Methods include the use of feedback forms (e.g., acceptability/feasibility questionnaires), self-reports (e.g., client symptomatology, trainee and supervisor self-reflections), and formal psychotherapy related assessment (e.g., interview measures for clients, formal evaluations of students and supervisors). Clinic audits each semester provide an opportunity to assess the clinic as a whole and identify overall and individual areas of strength and need for improvement. Additionally, remaining up to date with peer-reviewed literature is essential to providing competent services and evidenced based care. We encourage clinics to develop a central location accessible to all trainees, supervisors, and staff (e.g., Google drive, share point) for contributing and sharing peer-reviewed content on telepsychology modalities. Broadly, clinics should encourage a commitment to continuous growth through active participation in quality review and regular communication and feedback between student psychotherapists, supervisors, student clinic leaders, and the clinic director. Clinics that regularly assess functioning will be well-positioned to contribute to the evidence base of telepsychology (Dyason et al., 2019).
Proposed Telepsychology Curriculum Material: Core Topics
In addition to the general considerations presented above, we also believe certain considerations and factors are important to any telepsychology curriculum. We recognize clinics do not have the luxury of waiting for students to finish a semester or year-long course; thus, we offer five core topics for consideration in any telepsychology curriculum followed by a suggested training structure for an intensive four-session workshop.
Logistics
Clinics should ensure students and supervisors have the technical skills to navigate the telepsychology platform and orient clients to the new modality. Training sessions are an easy way to ensure students gain basic platform fluency. Additionally, it may be beneficial for both students and supervisors to conduct a “check-out” wherein a psychotherapy session is role-played and associated documentation is completed using the chosen telepsychology modality with the supervisor ensuring students meet a required set of competencies to lead and document a telepsychology session autonomously. This type of “check-out” ultimately provides an opportunity for the student psychotherapist to ask questions and demonstrate telepsychology proficiency prior to providing services independently. Other logistical considerations may include handling technological failures, scheduling, and completing adequate documentation (e.g., notes, reports, general paperwork communication) from the remote setting. This requires frequent communication between supervisee and supervisor as well as with the clinic director to ensure appropriate precautions are taken to protect patient privacy.
Ethical and Legal Considerations
Beyond adding such revised policies and procedures to clinic manual and handbook materials, we strongly recommend telepsychology curricula review these revisions. Past research demonstrates that providing a manual of instructions is generally not sufficient to promote effective telepsychology practices (Blignault & Kennedy, 1999). Thus, formally meeting with student psychotherapists and supervisors via virtual video platforms to discuss the revisions and walk through the ethical and legal guidance put forth in such a handbook or training manual is important as it provides a forum for questions and concerns that students and supervisors may not otherwise voice when provided with an updated manual or handbook. Discussions about maintaining clear boundaries and communication limits, role-playing risk management scenarios (e.g., suicidal ideation), understanding individual client risk issues (e.g., breach of confidentiality such as a family member gaining access to phone/computer, availability of child care during session), and unique aspects to conducting sessions remotely at home (e.g., inadvertent psychotherapist self-disclosure such as from a photo of an expensive vacation in the video background) are critical. Additionally, time should be allocated to ensuring trainees and supervisors alike understand documentation procedures and expectations for keeping client files up to date in a secure and safe manner. Clinics should also ensure trainees and supervisors understand interjurisdictional issues, including the relevant laws and regulations regarding interjurisdictional practice. We refer readers to Chenneville and Schwartz-Mette’s comprehensive paper (2020) as well as the APA ethics code (American Psychological Association, 2017) for further information regarding legal and ethical issues. Finally, such open discussion about the ethical and legal considerations through planned meetings nurture critical thinking and reflection, two core skills doctoral training programs aim to foster. Together, these steps are likely to promote competency in telepsychology among graduate students and result in increased comfort and likelihood of using telepsychology practices in their future careers.
Psychotherapy Related Clinical Assessment
Training time should also be specifically allocated to conducting clinical assessment for psychotherapy purposes through telepsychology mediums and providing guidance on administering assessments such as interviewer-rated and self-report measures. This can include scanning self-report measures to clients to complete and send back to the psychotherapist, developing self-reports into HIPAA-compliant data capturing software (e.g., REDCap), and having the psychotherapist read self-report items aloud over the telepsychology platform for the client to respond and the psychotherapist to fill out. Instruction and problem solving on administering psychotherapy related clinical assessments can be done through classroom discussion as well as through meetings set up between students and clinic staff to role-play. Such discussion also provides a platform for students to ask questions, provide feedback, and reflect on external placement procedures worthy of clinic adoption as well. We encourage training clinics to identify their respective clinic’s resources and treatment abilities and to refer clients to other agencies (e.g., hospitals) if needed.
Psychotherapy
While a growing literature base supports the use of evidence based therapies in telepsychology practice, clinics may wish to be more explicit with students and supervisors regarding what adaptations might be necessary for their specific clinics. For example, clinics should discuss telepresence, how to establish and maintain rapport, and strategies for picking up on nonverbal cues with limited data. Encouraging trainees to role-play addressing psychotherapy-interfering behaviors (e.g., client not in a private space, signing on late to session, getting distracted by the environment) will help develop confidence and competence in this new modality. Finally, trainees and supervisors may find benefit from specific training sessions focused on psychotherapy adaptation (e.g., shifting from psychotherapist led in-vivo to phone coaching in-vivo), as well as specific training sessions focused on helping student psychotherapists manage their own uncertainties during this time in order for trainees to improve their therapeutic presence.
Supervision
Finally, clinics should consider holding a supervision-specific training session to provide clarity with expectations and an opportunity to develop supervision contracts at the outset of telepsychology services (Amaro et al., 2020). This type of supervision training session should be mandatory for supervisors and open to upper level students interested in umbrella supervision. We encourage supervisors and umbrella supervisors to participate in the entire training process. Opportunities for umbrella supervision may be particularly beneficial if there is a licensed psychologist with greater telepsychology familiarity. Clinics may also wish to discuss consultation plans and establish community contacts through professional organizations for as needed consultation. Clinics should also consider the pros and cons of both in-person and telesupervision sessions and discuss these with students and supervisors as research suggests trainees perceive equivalent benefits from either modality (e.g., Jordan & Shearer, 2019).
Proposed Telepsychology Curriculum: Four-Session Workshop Primer

Drawing on the general considerations for the transition to telepsychology and core curricula topics, we propose an intensive four-session workshop to facilitate the development of comfort, confidence, and competence with telepsychology prior to initiating services with clients (see Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Four Session Mandatory Workshop Primer Led by Student Leaders
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
We envision this workshop could be led by student leaders (e.g., Master’s-level student clinic coordinators or student directors with significant clinical experience) under the supervision of the clinic director to ease faculty and supervisor burdens and complement other formalized training such as coursework. If clinics do not have student leaders or if the time-commitment involved in planning and executing such a training is inconsistent with student leader roles, we encourage clinic directors to adapt these guidelines to best meet their own clinic needs. We encourage clinics to make this workshop mandatory for students and strongly encourage supervisors attend as well.
The workshop is divided into three core content sessions followed by a fourth session for review and conducting a formal “check-out” with supervisors. We suggest offering each session in a 2–4 hr training block such as during the evening or on a weekend. We encourage spaced practice over massed practice; however, we appreciate some clinics may find it beneficial to collapse the sessions into one full-day intensive training. Each session ends with role-play practice but we encourage clinics to amend this if needed such as by assigning the role-plays for homework. The workshop’s first session covers introductory basics (e.g., definition of telepsychology, overview of platform(s)), clinic policies, and procedures. The second session covers professionalism, interpersonal communication (e.g., telepresence), consent and documentation procedures, and psychotherapy related assessment. The third session focuses on treatment planning, treatment modifications, and risk assessment, covering both in-session evaluations of risk and between-session crises. The final workshop session reviews material covered and is intended to be a mandatory meeting with all trainees, supervisors, and clinic leadership, particularly if supervisors did not participate in the previous trainings. The final session concludes with a formal “check-out” with supervisors wherein students would need to demonstrate proficiency with the telepsychology platform and role-play various scenarios including initial assessment, treatment planning, and risk assessment.
Our intent is for this workshop to serve as a primer for telepsychology practice and thus the materials within are unlikely to be comprehensive. We encourage training clinics to consider additional telepsychology education in the form of specific coursework (e.g., new telepsychology course) as outlined by Perle’s proposed curricula (2020) based on Maheu and colleagues’ telepsychology training competencies (2018). Additionally, training clinics may wish to consider existing coursework modifications (e.g., incorporation of telepsychology in ethics courses, psychotherapy courses), webinars, readings, and didactic discussions.
Conclusions

University training clinics are faced with the discomfort of heading in new directions to best meet the mental health needs of their communities and the training needs of their doctoral students. Clinics will need to be flexible and create a model for iterative improvement as new knowledge is gained through ongoing evaluation and reflection. In this paper we outlined considerations for training clinics, described core curricula topics necessary for inclusion in any training program, and offered a suggested format for an intensive four-session telepsychology primer. Overall, we encourage clinics to build in time and training to ensure students and supervisors alike develop a baseline familiarity and competence with telepsychology, from logistics to implementation. We also strongly advocate extensive role-playing to help trainees develop greater fluidity with telepsychology.
We encourage training directors to solicit student and supervisor feedback. Furthermore, in this global crisis, we have experienced an unwavering commitment from mental health agencies in our city, state, and across the globe to work together and share ideas regarding best-practices. In addition to obtaining feedback from all stakeholders, we also recommend clinic directors foster an environment that acknowledges the mental health needs of clinicians—both supervisors and trainees—and the many barriers faced with providing telepsychology during the pandemic when clinic offices are closed. This type of communication and checking in is likely to build a sense of support between students and their academic superiors that may more effectively foster communication and problem solving in a way that promotes student growth and improves telepsychology effectiveness with clients.
We encourage supervisors to be engaged in every step of the transition to telepsychology, including active participation in trainings. Clinics should identify supervisor expectations for availability, risk-management, documentation review, and supervision sessions and encourage frequent communication with both supervisees and the clinic director to ensure all clinic policies and guidelines are being met in trainees’ telepsychology practices. Role-playing various scenarios with trainees from connectivity issues to suicidal risk assessments will help boost confidence and preparedness in both supervisor and trainee. In line with this, we suggest supervisors hold some type of “check-out” with student psychotherapists to evaluate student competency and preparedness to lead telepsychology sessions independently. Furthermore, we encourage supervisors to serve as a liaison between student psychotherapist and clinic director if needed when issues or questions arise. This type of extra support may be particularly important during the transition to telepsychology to help student psychotherapists feel supported, while also ensuring they are providing adequate care for clients.
Finally, we encourage students to be mindful of, and advocate for, their own needs, whether that be their own mental health needs or training needs for the provision of telepsychology. We encourage students to be open with challenges that arise in conducting telepsychology remotely, such as concerns regarding an ability to adequately provide secure services due to small living spaces and poor internet connectivity. It is likely that these concerns are not unique to just one student, and bringing such concerns to the attention of supervisors and clinic directors is likely to aid in problem solving and implementation of improved policies in the future. In line with this, we encourage students to talk with each other and share resources and ideas obtained from other placements or externships successful with telepsychology platforms. While the transition to telepsychology may have occurred rapidly for many psychotherapists owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, we encourage students to use this transition as an opportunity for learning and telepsychology competency-building, while enhancing their skills in working adaptively and flexibly to meet client needs and those of the broader community.
Overall, we recognize the numerous challenges university training clinics are faced with in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a need for transitioning from in-person modalities to telepsychology. Striking a balance between best practices and this uncharted territory may present apprehension and concerns. In addition to acknowledging and embracing the uncertainty of this time, we hope these reflections offer some guidance and concrete steps that university training clinics can take to begin the process of providing telepsychology services.",
"5": "In mid-March, 2020, the authors—as well as the majority of therapists—were advised to work from home rather than the office to help stop the spread of Covid-19. Thus, the Covid-19 pandemic began to shape a new personal and professional reality that specifically related to how therapists provide psychotherapy services. The uncertain duration of this new professional reality has constrained therapists in ways that no one could have predicted and has required significant adjustments to be made and creativity to be employed in terms of finding new ways to work remotely and effectively from home offices that were perhaps never originally intended to serve as therapeutic spaces.
In this mixed-method study, we focused on assessing psychotherapists’ challenges providing psychotherapy services from home during the Covid-19 pandemic. We examined the specific adaptations participants implemented to improve their experiences and their clients’ experiences in the therapeutic relationship. This article offers readers an opportunity to learn about ways to overcome challenges while providing teletherapy from home. Finally, it offers participants’ perceptions about the possibility of returning to the office to see clients in person.
Literature Review

There is ample research on effective remote psychotherapy. The results from some studies have shown that it can be as effective as in-person psychotherapy (Poletti et al., 2020; Roesler, 2017), such as the systematic reviews that have been done on videoconferencing as a psychotherapy tool (Backhaus et al., 2012; Shigekawa et al., 2018; Simpson, 2009). A body of empirical literature related to the delivery of remote psychotherapy from therapists’ homes is gradually developing. Evans et al. (2020) have focused on a new ethical conflict that has arisen in the field since the emergence of the Covid-19 pandemic. They have found that continuing to see clients face-to-face would put the lives of therapists and their patients at risk and would therefore be unethical, but terminating with clients during a global pandemic would not be best practice either. To mediate this conflict, many clinicians have chosen to continue providing treatment by working remotely.
Békés and Aafjes-van Doorn (2020) surveyed 145 psychotherapists to collect their demographics and assess their attitudes toward online psychotherapy during the Covid-19 pandemic. The majority of the participants were women who resided in the United States and worked in independent practice. The participants were recruited via professional email lists, social media, and individual contacts. Most of the participants reported a somewhat positive attitude toward the transition to online psychotherapy during the pandemic. The results from this study showed that positive attitudes toward online psychotherapy were correlated with past positive experiences with providing remote services. Attitudes toward online psychotherapy were also influenced by the participants’ reports of feeling tired, less connected, and less authentic in sessions. Another important variable was the modality of treatment that the clinician used. Participants who utilized a cognitive–behavioral approach reported more positive attitudes toward online psychotherapy compared with those who used a primarily psychodynamic approach. The authors of the study speculated that this may have been due to the fact that psychodynamic therapy places a greater emphasis on the relational process as a mechanism of change—more so than other short-term modalities such as cognitive–behavioral therapy. This empirical study has made an important contribution as one of the very first to explore therapists’ attitudes toward their work during the pandemic.
MacMullin et al. (2020) used the actor–network method, which is an approach to studying science and technology that focuses on the integration of networks (Latour, 2013), to qualitatively investigate psychotherapists’ experiences with online therapy. They conducted five semistructured interviews with Canadian psychotherapists who worked independent practice and found that the participants were comfortable with remote work and felt it was effective. However, they reported that the participants expressed some confusion about how to set boundaries with clients during the therapeutic interaction when providing online therapy and their ability to trust technology (the platform they used and Internet connection).
Békés et al.’s (2020) survey on therapists’ experiences of practicing psychotherapy or psychoanalysis remotely during Covid-19 yielded similar results. The researchers recruited 190 therapists using professional listservs mainly from the fields of psychology, social work, and psychiatry. The majority of the participants were women who worked in independent practice and lived in the United States. The researchers found that the participants felt confident in their work with patients and were able to relate and stay emotionally connected and authentic during their online encounters. While their views on remote therapy were more positive during the pandemic than they were prepandemic, the majority of the participants still found in-person therapy to be more effective.
Finally, Aafjes-van Doorn et al. (2020) studied levels of vicarious trauma among 339 therapists as a result of working with traumatized patients during the Covid-19 pandemic. The participants were psychotherapists who had seen at least one client in remote sessions since the pandemic started. Through the survey, the authors gathered demographic (personal and professional) information and asked questions about vicarious trauma that captured the participants’ experiences with the cumulative effects of empathic engagement with patients who have a history of trauma. The results from this study showed that 74.9% of the participants reported that they felt tired, and 47.8% reported that they had experienced having a hard time connecting to their client. On average, the therapists experienced moderate levels of vicarious trauma. Those who experienced a higher level were younger in age, had relatively less clinical experience, and had past negative experiences with remote treatment.
Method

Procedure
Upon receiving ethical approval from the Human Research and Ethics Committee of Long Island University (IRB Protocol 20/05–097), we recruited mental health professionals through dedicated and diverse professional listservs designed for social workers, psychologists, and art therapists. During the month of June 2020, we sent out a recruitment email that included a link to the survey. All participants signed an electronic informed consent form, which included a statement of ethics approval for the study as well as the goals of the research. Ninety-two therapists agreed to participate in an online survey that included demographic questions as well as questions about their perceptions of the therapeutic alliance and their professional and personal experiences providing remote treatment during the pandemic. For a detailed overview of the participants who participated in the survey, see Table 1.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Descriptive Characteristics of the 92 Therapists
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
At the end of the online survey, the participants were given the option of participating in a semistructured interview (“Please provide your email address if you would like to schedule an interview of up to 45 minutes in length”). Each participant who provided their email address received a separate email in response. A total of 19 therapists agreed to participate in a telephone interview with the researchers.
Instrument
For the quantitative phase of the study, we developed an anonymous online survey with 55 questions to address the research questions. The survey was designed following the recent literature (Békés & Aafjes-van Doorn, 2020; Békés et al., 2020; MacMullin et al., 2020) and a content analysis of email messages posted on psychotherapy listservs. In the survey, we used Likert scale statements (e.g., strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, and strongly agree) as options for answering the questions. Higher scores on each scale indicated greater agreement with the questions present in each scale. The survey included positively and negatively worded questions that were reversed during the analysis to increase consistency.
For the qualitative phase of the study, we developed an interview guide with 15 questions that was based on the recent literature and empirical data on remote therapy during the pandemic (Békés & Aafjes-van Doorn, 2020; Békés et al., 2020; MacMullin et al., 2020). Phone interviews were conducted by the research team using a protocol that began by giving the participants an introduction to the study and was followed by asking the participants open-ended questions relating to their experiences of providing remote therapy during the pandemic. The next set of questions asked the participants to describe any changes they had observed in their relationships with their clients due to the transition to remote work. Finally, the participants were asked to share some examples of challenging moments that they had faced that would not have likely occurred had they been in their offices, as well as their thoughts and feelings about returning to in-person work.
Data Analysis
Procedures for Analyzing the Quantitative Data
Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (v. 27) was used to analyze the quantitative data. Reverse coding ensured that all the numerical scoring scales were in the same direction. The data were descriptively analyzed in order to demonstrate the shape, central tendency, and variability within the data set. The results section presents the valid percentage of the responses.
Procedures for Analyzing the Qualitative Data
A thematic analysis was undertaken (Braun & Clarke, 2006) to analyze the qualitative data. In this process, the recorded interviews were transcribed and read in order to identify concepts. After repeating these steps across all the transcripts, emerging codes and categories were compared by two reviewers (the authors), connected as appropriate, and organized into key concepts.
Results

The majority of the participants self-identified as White women with an average age of 46.2 (SD = 18.02; range, 25–75). Of them, 80.5% (n = 74) had a social worker degree, 17.4% had a psychology degree (n = 16), and 2.1% had a counseling degree (n = 2). All of the participants had been seeing all or most of their clients face-to-face in their psychotherapy offices prior to the pandemic. The participants used both phone and online platforms, such as Zoom (n = 44, 47.8%) and Webex and Doxy (n = 23, 25%), a combination of a phone and online platform (n = 18, 19.6%), and other online platforms such as FaceTime, Skype, WhatsApp, and Google Meet (n = 7, 7.6%) to provide therapy.
The results are divided into seven categories of challenges and outcomes that are “solutions” or adjustments that our participants found or made in order to cope with the difficulties they experienced because of the pandemic and the transition to remote work: (a) shared trauma, (b) adjustment without preparation, (c) psychotherapy with children, (d) Zoom fatigue, (e) lack of privacy, (f) psychotherapy with new clients, and (g) negotiating physical and relational space/re-creating boundaries. We conclude with some mixed-method data about the participants’ perceptions of transitioning back to the office in the future, which is a topic that is particularly salient to therapists given the current situation.
Challenge 1: Shared Trauma
Challenge
The majority of participants (60.8%, n = 56) found it difficult to help their clients cope with the trauma of the pandemic because they too were coping with their own trauma. Participant B.L. shared, “Some of my friends have died, which rocked me and made me extra sensitive.” Some participants reported that they had contracted the virus themselves and therefore had to prioritize their own health.
It was inevitable that the emotional impact of the pandemic on the therapist would be a topic that would arise in sessions. Participant E.W. reported that her clients had requested more self-disclosure from her, and as a result, she felt she needed to be more revelatory about herself. The levels of stress and anxiety that participants experienced as a result of the pandemic have impacted their ability to offer the best care possible to their clients. In order to maintain the efficacy of their work throughout the crisis, it required greater personal and professional awareness on the part of clinicians.
Outcome
Despite its challenges, the participants highlighted that the experience of shared trauma helped with the “bonding” process between them and their clients. Participant E.W. stated,
I think it’s the closest in some ways that we get to a shared really challenging experience; some people have mentioned it even equalizes things a little bit because we’re all dealing with the same issue. This shared struggle . . . brings us closer.
Participant M.K. agreed: “Some clients have asked about me for the first time ever. A little bit of self-disclosure is needed on the part of the therapist to bring them and clients closer.” She felt that her clients had begun to see her as “more human.” Similarly, Participant B.M. felt that the shared reality of the pandemic has been validating for some clients. “It levels the playing field. They are not alone in their anxiety . . . it’s like the world is resonating with them instead of them feeling out of step with the world.” The shared trauma, at least at the beginning of the pandemic, offered an example of how therapists go through the same experiences as their clients. This reality cannot be ignored, especially under the current circumstances.
Challenge 2: Adjustment Without Preparation
Challenge
Clinicians were forced to adapt to their new settings quickly. In our study, 69.6% of the participants (n = 64) agreed that conducting therapy remotely during the pandemic had been challenging for them. For some who had previous experience providing remote therapy, the transition had been easier. For most, regardless of their previous experience, the idea of working from home for an indeterminant amount of time seemed daunting. As a matter of fact, only 18.5% of the participants (n = 17) reported taking an online course/training in telehealth before or during the pandemic.
For those participants who worked in institutional practices as opposed to private practices, the lack of regulations on the preferred Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)–compliant platforms through which to communicate with patients, access to medical records from personal computers, and the client’s ability to sign documents also made the transition more challenging. Participant U.G., who worked at an outpatient mental health clinic, explained, “There was a lot of confusion regarding procedures, which platforms were okay to use, how we do our notes and billing. There was a lot of panic, which made it very difficult.”
Outcome
The participants reported that it took them some time to adjust to providing consistent remote treatment. Some were reluctant at first, mainly because they had little experience using technology in their work. However, after an awkward start, they eventually became more comfortable, and using technology began to feel akin to seeing clients in the office. Nonetheless, 83.7% of the participants (n = 77) reported a notable difference between face-to-face therapy done in the office and remote therapy. Although the transition was rough for many at the beginning, clinicians eventually settled into the new routine and gained confidence in their ability to provide remote therapy. Consistent with other participants, Participant A.J. explained, “I didn’t expect it to be so easy and such a positive experience.” She had originally dreaded the transition, thinking that it would not be rewarding and assuming that it would be “terrible” and “ineffective.” She stated, “My view has changed . . . this has definitely opened up my mind toward the possibility that [remote therapy] can be workable, and for some people it’s more workable than face-to-face.”
Challenge 3: Psychotherapy With Children
Challenge
Therapists who worked with children found the transition to remote to be particularly difficult. “With the children, I think it’s just so much harder to build a therapeutic alliance. It just takes so much longer for them to get comfortable,” stated Participant A.L. “There are certain games we could play over Zoom, but it’s limited, and this is going on for so many months, so at a certain point, we kind of run out of things to play.” He noted that short attention spans, common among children, make it that much more challenging to engage them in play therapy online. Participant B.K. also found remote work with children to be challenging, mainly because it required tools that she did not have at hand, as work with this population is usually not reliant on talk therapy alone but required play therapy toys or art materials.
Outcome
Overcoming the challenges relating to working therapeutically with children remotely required much more preparation, research, and adaptation in order for the remote therapy to be successful. Participant B.K. explained,
Play therapy is much harder to do remotely. I had to find a virtual app to do this work, which has been a tremendous relief for them and me. The first time using it successfully with a client left me feeling elated.
Therapists who worked with children have had to think more outside the box and be creative with their interventions. As part of their adaptations, participants mentioned using the share screen option on Zoom to play a game or to draw together.
Challenge 4: Zoom Fatigue
Challenge
Another challenge reported by the participants in their adjustment process was experiencing “Zoom fatigue,” a term coined to describe the cumulative effects of using video platforms for extended periods each day (Reinach Wolf, 2020; Wiederhold, 2020). The participants in this study grew tired of staring at a screen for hours at a time each day, specifically at the beginning of the transition. Not being able to read their client’s full body language required therapists to compensate by paying especially close attention to what was in their view, such as observing eye contact or shifting in one’s seat. Participant B.M., a hospital social worker, explained, “I have to watch people’s faces a lot more. It’s hard because I have to be more present than in the room. . . . It’s more exhausting because your face is also on the screen.”
“Zoom fatigue,” or “Zoom drain,” made the therapists’ days feel longer and required working harder to engage their clients. Participant M.K. described what they were missing when seeing clients through a camera: “Not to see full body presentations of clients, especially during intakes with new clients . . . you’re missing out on affect. Body language can tell a whole different story, so that’s definitely rough.” The participants explained that although they could not see their clients’ full bodies, they were able to see close-ups of their clients’ faces, which helped. Participant D.F. shared,
I do not feel like I miss a lot of cues because I’m not seeing all of them; plus, in a way, the way Zoom works, you’re seeing them so close up it’s like you see every little flicker of the tiny muscles around their eyes in a way that you wouldn’t necessarily if they were sitting a normal sort of therapeutic distance from you.
The camera view forced participants to be more attuned and to pay closer attention to their clients’ subtle nuances.
Outcome
The majority of our participants (89.1%, n = 82) found that having the support of their peers, supervision groups, families, and friends—as well as engaging in self-care practices, such as yoga and exercise—was extremely helpful in coping with the emotional and psychological effects of the pandemic, including Zoom fatigue. Some of the participants became involved in therapy groups online, which provided them with support and ideas and allowed them to connect with other clinicians. The participants who found remote work to be physically challenging as a result of sitting in front of a screen for many hours found it effective to spread their sessions out throughout the week instead of compressing them into 1 or 2 days a week. The participants reported that getting outside and taking walks in between sessions was helpful. One participant reported that she sometimes took naps in between sessions as a way to recharge and be more fully present with her clients. Participant Y.L. reported that she allowed herself a few minutes in between her sessions in order to ease some of the effects of Zoom fatigue.
Challenge 5: Lack of Privacy
Challenge
Challenge 5 is divided into two categories: (a) lack of privacy and (b) distraction. Sixty percent of the participants (n = 55) reported that they had some concerns about their clients’ privacy during therapy sessions. For example, Participant G.D. explained, “My young clients, whose family members [are] in the other room, do not feel so comfortable speaking and [have] asked me many times when can we meet in person in the office.” The participants have found the lack of privacy during remote sessions to be a significant barrier. For clients living in small, crowded spaces without access to headphones, and for children with intrusive parents, disclosure became more difficult.
In addition, the participants described struggling with paying attention due to multiple distractions in the new setup, with 84.8% of participants (n = 78) reporting that they noticed when their clients became distracted during a session. In working from home, therapists have not only had to adjust to working with clients over a screen but have also had to cope with challenges that they would not likely encounter in the office. For example, the participants shared how their pets, partners, and children indirectly became part of the sessions. Participant W.S. shared one embarrassing moment that also impacted privacy: “My husband mixed up my schedule and showed up in the room during a session; I had to shoo him away without the client knowing.” Similarly, Participant S.D. explained, “My dog tends to bark at people walking by the house, so my clients have gotten to know my dog pretty well. I think it does make me seem a little bit more relatable.” In another scenario, Participant M.L. shared, “Clients get to meet my cats, which has brought up a range of reactions.”
Another distraction that impacted remote work from home related to technology, for example, technological issues such as a poor Internet connection, incoming phone calls, or message notifications. Most participants agreed that choppy Wi-Fi created a lot of disruption and sometimes even stress. Participant L.T. explained, “When Zoom freezes, it’s so frustrating and interrupts the flow.” Such occurrences required participants to ask their clients to repeat what they had just shared, which affected their emotional expressions as a result and amounted to a significant disruption in the therapeutic work.
Outcome
In order to overcome privacy issues, 68.5% of the participants reported having conversations surrounding privacy (n = 63). Ninety-two percent of the participants (n = 85) used a HIPAA-compliant telehealth platform in order to protect their clients’ privacy and legally adhere to the HIPAA rules (e.g., use of approved telehealth platforms such as Zoom). When the problem of privacy was related to the client’s physical space, the therapist prompted the client to find a solution. Participant G.D. explained, “I asked her [the client] if we should change the time of the session so her parents are not home. In another case, I encouraged the client to speak about privacy with her parents.”
Change of the physical setting was adapted by some of the participants. Participant L.K. suggested that clinicians ask themselves, “What do I look like to my clients? What are they seeing on their screen?” She consulted with an interior designer for tips on setting up her home workspace to look as much like her office as possible. She experimented with different lighting, backgrounds, and placements of the camera. Now, when she conducts remote sessions, she sits at her desk with an empty couch behind her so there is nothing personal on display except “maybe a candle and a lamp to warm up the room.” Similarly, Participant M.C. had to create a setup for herself that was more conducive to providing therapy, such as angling the camera so she was not displaying her entire living room but rather only a part of the wall (on which she added a few postcards for a bit of color) and a bookshelf. This felt more conducive to providing therapy by minimizing unnecessary self-disclosure and other distractions.
According to the participants, their patients also found many creative ways to work around these obstacles, such as getting a noise-cancelling machine, going to the park, or sitting in their cars in order to gain a sense of privacy during sessions. This enabled them to continue sharing and growing as they had before the pandemic and the transition to remote work. Participant A.F., who works with children, gave an example of a client who wanted to talk about his confusion around his sexuality. However, living in a small apartment with several family members around meant that he was not comfortable verbalizing his feelings due to the risk of being overheard. To remedy this, the participant encouraged the client to type his thoughts in a chat box instead, because “typing felt much more safe [for the child].”
Challenge 6: Psychotherapy With New Clients
Challenge
Beginning a therapeutic relationship with a new client proved challenging for many of our participants. Seventy-four percent of the participants (n = 68) began working with new clients remotely during the pandemic. Participant E.W. explained, “There definitely feels like a disconnect, not seeing them in person. Especially since some of them don’t even want to do [video], so we’ve only done phone sessions, so I can’t even put a face to the name.” The participants reported that it was harder to build trust, make full assessments, establish appropriate goals, and form working alliances with their new clients over the phone or video. This was mainly related to the fact that the remote work created a sense of distance and detachment, which presented a challenge for the participants in establishing the therapeutic frame necessary to deepen the therapeutic process.
Some of the participants discussed the bureaucratic issues that accompanied making the transition to remote work, such as navigating paperwork. Participant M.B. explained,
I had to adjust to the opening paperwork because I had a really nice way of introducing it in a first session in person. I found a way that is minimally daunting for them, but that’s the main piece that feels different. Once the session is started, it has been smooth since everyone is used to video these days.
Therefore, routine initial interactions and processes in the office setting have had to be adapted to accommodate the remote setting as therapists have taken on new clients during the pandemic.
Outcome
While it was initially more challenging for many of the therapists surveyed to build rapport with new clients and understand the presenting problems, the participants also reported becoming more comfortable over the course of time to engage with clients remotely—especially if the sessions were conducted over a video platform as opposed to on the phone. It became easier when they found ways to introduce clients to the therapeutic frame, send intake forms via email, and speak with their clients about the challenges that come with remote treatment. It was a learning curve for both clients and therapists alike, which furthered the sense of connectedness. Sharing the feeling that they were “all in this together” was helpful for the participants as they built rapport with their new clients.
Challenge 7: Negotiating Physical and Relational Space: Re-creating Boundaries
Challenge
The change in the physical therapeutic space was one of the most immediate adjustments that therapists who transitioned to remote work during the pandemic were forced to make. For most participants, this transition felt like “new territory” because there were no clear guidelines on how to conduct therapy remotely from home. For example, which platform was the best to use? Should the therapist call the client or vice versa? Was there a designated space where the therapist and the client should sit during sessions? How should disturbing background noises be dealt with? How does the therapeutic hour start? Things that seemed to be self-evident in the office environment suddenly became less so over the computer.
The transition to remote work introduced a relational challenge into the work as the use of a remote platform created an inherent distance between the therapist and the client. The safe holding environment of the therapist’s office was no longer there to support the clients. Participant B.K. explained that the dramatic change in the therapeutic space became a transferential issue, stating that for some clients,
It’s been harder to explore because it’s a little bit of a reality piece because when such issues have come up in their treatment in the past, you can sort of be like “Look, I’m here, so let’s talk about why it feels to you like I’m not,” but now, working remotely, I’m here but I’m not here.
Moreover, Participant B.M. explained one particular downside of practicing in a remote setting: “Clients are no longer able to sit in my safe space that I have for them in my office, which was very much an extension of me, really.”
The participants also discussed the complexity of seeing their clients in their clients’ own homes. For some of the participants, it was advantageous to gain a literal peek into their clients’ worlds—unfiltered and in the absolute here and now. Participant M.C. described one striking example of a session in which her patient was cooking and brandishing a knife while she was talking about her partner. This act, needless to say, would not have taken place in the traditional office setting. It did, however, allow them an opportunity to explore clients’ feelings that perhaps would have not come up otherwise. Witnessing patients interact with the people—and things—in their homes offered the participants insights that simply would not have come across through talk therapy done in an office setting; therefore, it uniquely benefited the progression and depth of the work.
Outcome
The participants had to consider how the physical distance and lack of a shared space influenced the therapeutic relationship. Only 17.3% of the participants (n = 16) felt that the process of engaging clients remotely was similar to engaging clients in the office. Seventy-four percent of the participants (n = 68) reported that much more effort was required of them in order to build or maintain the therapeutic working alliance. The change in setting required them to have new types of discussions with their clients surrounding boundaries. Eighty-eight percent of the participants reported speaking with clients about their thoughts and feelings regarding the transition, which, to participants, felt like “new territory.” Many of these challenges were mediated by “learning on the go” and adapting and changing according to the participant’s positive/negative experiences. While not ideal, the participants all found ways to manage and move forward.
Some participants thought that for many of their clients, being at home proved beneficial to the therapeutic work; the clients appeared to feel freer and more relaxed by engaging in therapy from the comfort of their homes in their own territories. Participant M.T.W. explained that therapy from the client’s own personal space offers them some added comfort, both physically and emotionally:
I think the advantage is that these patients who suffer from complex trauma or are highly reactive—[who are now engaging in therapy from] the safety of home—is that if at any time during the session they find themselves feeling overwhelmed, then it’s perfectly acceptable to say that’s enough for today . . . and I think that having the freedom to disengage during the session has been helpful to these patients.
In some cases, meeting remotely from their own personal spaces also allowed clients to go deeper with the work. As noted by Participant E.M., a trauma specialist,
In-person intimacy of therapy can feel really overwhelming and the benefit of just them being able to be in their own space in the safety of their own apartment or house and then just the distance of the virtual sessions gives that little bit of space so that it’s not so overwhelming.
Regarding therapy conducted over the phone that omits any visual element, Participant B.K. stated, “Clients don’t worry as much about my reactions and therefore feel freer to go deeper. It’s easier to bring up intense, scary feelings. It reproduces the analytic couch experience.” The majority of participants agreed that although the initial transition was challenging, once they found their footing, the work tended to go more smoothly.
Moving Forward
The participants were asked about their plans to return to the office to see their clients in person again. Although the desire to return to in-person sessions was common among the participants, they were also fine with continuing to work remotely until the office is a safe space to meet again. In fact, 71% of the participants would not mind continuing to see their clients remotely (n = 65).
An overwhelming majority of the participants interviewed (n = 16) made it clear that if the choice were between returning to in-person sessions with a mask or other barrier or continuing to work remotely, they would without a doubt choose the latter. As Participant L.K. explained, “It’s a conundrum. I would like to be back, but then we would have to talk through a mask. What would that do? What kind of barrier will that pose? Our voices will be muffled.” Participant M.C. agreed because she enjoyed working remotely: “It takes discipline. Going back to a small office, in full PPE, an N95 face mask, going into therapy with someone who looks like they’re going into surgery. If that’s the case, I’d rather work remotely.” To add to that narrative, 55.4% of participants were sure that they would only see clients face-to-face once there was a vaccine to protect against Covid-19 (n = 51).
Despite the challenges that the participants have faced by conducting remote therapy from their personal spaces, they have found working from home to offer a satisfactory solution to overcoming the problems created by Covid-19. On the whole, they felt that the advantages of working in this manner outweighed its challenges, and some have considered continuing to work remotely indefinitely.
Discussion

Most likely, engaging in remote therapy from one’s personal space will continue beyond the duration of the pandemic and will become the new normal for clinicians and clients alike. Our study’s results show that therapists have been able to handle the transition to remote psychotherapy from home successfully. Our participants were able to find their own ways of coping with the transition while ensuring that their clients’ needs were prioritized. Nevertheless, there are still obstacles that should be addressed in relation to HIPAA law, confidentiality, privacy, and technology interruptions.
The data analysis revealed heterogeneity in the provision of remote therapy. For example, the platform used for online sessions varied from one therapist to another, as did the device that was used; some therapists chose to begin the session by calling the client (opening the door), while others had the clients call them (client knocking on the door). Because of these and other variables, we argue that it is essential to create professional standards for providing remote therapy, particularly when it is conducted outside of the office space. While the American Psychiatric Association has collaborated with the American Telemedicine Association (American Psychiatric Association & American Telemedicine Association, 2018) to create guidelines for best practices in offering videoconferencing-based telemental health (Shore et al., 2018), these remain insufficient specifically because home is the new office. Publishing additional guidelines specific to providing remote therapy during a pandemic, as well as the preferred methods for its delivery, would prove highly supportive to both senior and junior clinicians in their work.
Since our personal spaces now function as our new workspaces, not only has the physical boundary between work and home been lost, but for many, so too has the psychological boundary. This lack of separation between their work life and their personal life has sabotaged therapists’ ability to process and “decompress” in between or after sessions and made it difficult to establish boundaries. Thus, greater attention should be paid to the heightened risk of burnout and compassion fatigue among therapists due to the lack of physical and psychological separation between work and home.
Limitations
One of the limitations of this study is the fact that the sample was a convenience sample. The majority of the participants were social workers in independent practice in New York and New Jersey. As a result, the sample lacks the randomization and accuracy that is so important when conducting research. Moreover, the analysis failed to include variation between groups. Specifically, since close to 40% of the sample was aged 60 and above, there may have been differentiation in the participants’ experiences based on their age and familiarity with technology.
Given that the majority of the participants in this study were social workers, future studies could consider how the pandemic has affected clinicians from other disciplines as well, specifically psychologists and psychiatrists. The anecdotal evidence shows that the experience has been similar (Békés et al., 2020; Callahan, 2020; Inchausti et al., 2020), but nevertheless, there is room to replicate this study with a disciplinarily heterogeneous population.
Finally, the survey was limited in its ability to cover questions related to the confidentiality and privacy of the therapists and their clients. Maintaining confidentiality is a crucial part of the therapeutic relationship and likely jeopardized when home becomes the office and clients are deprived of access to a safe therapeutic space. Thus, further research is needed on how conducting therapy from home affects privacy and confidentiality.
Implications for the Future of Psychotherapy Post-Covid-19
One of the most important findings of our study is that as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, therapists, clients, managed care companies, and other significant stakeholders have been given the chance to learn that teletherapy is not only possible but also necessary. Few of the participants had received training on how to conduct therapy outside of the office during a pandemic. We recommend implementing a curriculum for students as well as clinicians that offers tools for providing effective remote therapy, specifically when it is conducted by therapists working from home. This is especially critical because Covid-19 is now our new reality, and it will likely take some time to return to what was once the normal way of working face-to-face in an office setting. We believe that such training will facilitate the work for clinicians, improve the therapeutic connection, and, most important, create professional standards for this new way of working.
The results of this study also revealed different sets of challenges for therapists working with children as opposed to adults. Not being in the same physical space or having access to the games, toys, and other such tools that are essential to play therapy proved especially challenging. It required therapists to prepare for sessions by doing research in advance to find creative ways of keeping young clients engaged through play. We recommend conducting a study of the experiences of therapists who work remotely with children in order to determine what therapists have found to be most effective for maintaining the therapeutic alliance and ensuring that the quality of their work is on par with working face-to-face in the office.
Finally, there is a great need to probe the possibility of making the transition back to the office and seeing clients in the office safely by relying on masks or social distancing techniques. The potential challenges related to this topic were briefly covered by the participants in this study, but it was not the main focus of the research. We believe that more information needs to be gathered in order to smooth the transition and really learn how to do it effectively.
Conclusion

The learning curve for therapists conducting therapy remotely from home during a global pandemic has been steep. Mere months ago, we believed that it would just be a matter of time before we returned to “normal.” Now we understand that life with Covid-19 is the new normal. Consequently, remote therapy will remain a common method of work and perhaps even become the preferred method. Therefore, therapists will need to learn how to balance their personal and professional lives better and manage their screen time to prevent Zoom fatigue and burnout. Overall, our results show that, during the rapid transition to provide teletherapy from home due to the Covid-19 pandemic, therapists experienced some challenges related to their relationships with their clients, technology, and privacy. However, they were able to find solutions to keep their therapeutic relationships with their clients professional and beneficial. Further research and training are needed to help therapists develop best practices to more effectively build and maintain alliances with their clients when they are not in the same physical space.",
"6":"In early January of 2020, Chinese health authorities notified the World Health Organization (WHO) that a new type of coronavirus (COVID-19) had been identified as the cause of an outbreak of respiratory infections in Wuhan City, China. By mid-January, nearly 300 cases of the new virus had been diagnosed across China, Japan, Korea, and Thailand (WHO, 2020a). Confirmed cases of COVID-19 quickly swelled to more than 85,000 by the end of February (WHO 2020b), and by mid-March WHO declared COVID-19 to be a pandemic, with nearly 120,000 people testing positive worldwide (WHO, 2020d). In response to the rapid spread of the virus, WHO recommended that people take precautionary measures such as maintaining physical distance to reduce the risk of interpersonal transmission (WHO, 2020c), and governments, institutions, and businesses in the United States moved to online models for conducting their daily activities whenever possible (Adalja, Toner, & Inglesby, 2020).
In anticipation of the possibility that the health care infrastructure could become overwhelmed, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the American College of Surgeons (ACS) recommended that in-person routine health care visits and elective medical procedures be postponed (ACS, 2020; CDC, 2020b). Large health care organizations such as the Veterans Health Administration (VHA), Mayo Clinic Health System, and Johns Hopkins Medicine shifted toward utilizing telehealth services to meet patient needs while lessening interpatient and staff transmission risk and conserving medical supplies (Nitkin, 2020; Stiepan, 2020; VHA, Office of Emergency Management, 2020). Reports from the Chinese scientific community showed that ambiguity around COVID-19 contagiousness, prevalence, and risk, as well as mandated social isolation, have been associated with spikes in levels of anxiety, panic disorder, and depression in the general population (Qiu et al., 2020). For patients already receiving mental health care services, many original presenting problems have been overshadowed by increased fear, depression, anxiety, and panic (Perrin, Rybarczyk, et al., 2020). Public access to nonstop media coverage of the pandemic as well as exposure to social media may also have implications for increased mental health concerns (Gao et al., 2020; McDonnell, Nelson, & Schunk, 2012; United States Department of Health and Human Services Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2014). Furthermore, fundamental coping strategies like seeking social support to improve mental health (e.g., Harandi, Taghinasab, & Nayeri, 2017) through gathering with friends and family and at places of worship have suddenly become unavailable.
Efforts to meet the health needs of new and established patients have required unprecedented measures by government agencies and other public and private systems, institutions, and companies. Since the VHA is an example of an integrated federal health system which had already been implementing and developing telepsychology prior to COVID-19, many of the barriers faced by psychologists outside the VHA system have been addressed, and its system may serve as an exemplar of how to deploy telepsychology (Perrin, Pierce, & Elliott, 2020). For example, online trainings with experienced trainers are already accessible to all providers (Caver et al., 2020). As veterans being served by the VHA are prequalified for services, reimbursement questions are largely nonexistent. Interstate practice within the VHA system is allowed, removing another external barrier to providing telepsychological services.
In the VHA and more broadly, Medicare temporarily relaxed reimbursement restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic and allowed reimbursement for telemedicine visits at the same rate as in-person visits (United States Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS], 2020). Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulations were eased by the United States Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR) to allow use of telecommunication apps like Skype, FaceTime, and Zoom (OCR, 2020a, 2020b). HHS also published waivers allowing telehealth providers participating in Medicare, Medicaid, and the Children’s Health Insurance Program to be reimbursed for visits with patients in states they were not currently licensed within (HHS, 2020). Furthermore, in response to declarations of emergency, psychology boards in several states including Arizona, California, and Texas suspended typical interjurisdictional requirements to allow psychologists not licensed within their state to provide treatment in their jurisdiction (California Board of Psychology, 2020; State of Arizona Board of Psychologist Examiners, 2020; Texas State Board of Examiners of Psychologists, 2020).
Many professional psychology training programs and clinics moved rapidly to telepsychology with tele-supervision (e.g., Perrin, Rybarczyk, et al., 2020), and the Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC) facilitated this, communicating that training hours via telepsychology could be counted the same as in-person (APPIC, 2020). Training programs were established through organizations such as the TeleBehavioral Health Institute (2020), and the American Psychological Association (APA) developed tools and resources to aid psychologists in their adoption of telepsychology (e.g., APA, 2020; Martin, Millán, & Campbell, 2020). Psychology organizations around the world, such as the European Federation of Psychologists’ Associations (EFPA) and the Australian Psychological Society (APS), also quickly developed resources for not only their members, but also consumers so they, too, could become accustomed to the idea of using telepsychology for their therapy (APS, 2020; EFPA, 2020).
Pre-COVID-19 State of Telepsychology

Telepsychology, according to the APA, is the use of any of a number of telecommunication technologies to deliver psychological services (APA, 2015). Therefore, telepsychological services may run the gamut from smartphone apps meant to enhance treatment adherence (Reger et al., 2013) to Internet-based self-management tools for individuals with depression (Görges, Oehler, von Hirschhausen, Hegerl, & Rummel-Kluge, 2020) and other extensions of in-person services (Heesacker, Perez, Quinn, & Benton, 2020), to synchronous provision of audiovisual telepsychotherapy (Adler, Pritchett, Kauth, & Nadorff, 2014). Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, telepsychology was being used but in a limited capacity. Despite the availability of the technology for some time and the findings that for many psychological issues telepsychology is just as effective as in-person sessions (Varker, Brand, Ward, Terhaag, & Phelps, 2019), many psychologists had been slow to adopt telepsychology as a substantial part of their practice. Previous national-level research suggested that only about 21% of psychologists used telepsychology in their clinical practice (Pierce, Perrin, & McDonald, 2020b). An exception to this may be psychologists in the VHA, which was an early mover in telehealth and provided nearly 100,000 patients with telehealth services between 2006 and 2010 (Godleski, Darkins, & Peters, 2012). The VHA had been promoting the use of telepsychology as a way to reach veterans who would otherwise have limited access to mental health services because of geographic distance (Adler et al., 2014) and to reduce the length and frequency of psychiatric admissions (Godleski et al., 2012).
Pre-COVID-19 Barriers to Telepsychology

As telepsychology has been shown to be efficacious (Varker et al., 2019) and efficient (e.g., Adler et al., 2014; Darkins, 2016; Tadmor, McManus, & Koenig, 2006), one might wonder why it was not being utilized more extensively before the COVID-19 pandemic. A number of intrapsychic and environmental barriers to the adoption of telepsychology by psychologists have been identified. For example, many psychologists seemed to have doubts regarding the ease of using telepsychology in practice, as well as how useful it might be (Pierce et al., 2020b). Additionally, despite acknowledging its potential usefulness for therapy, approximately 75% of psychologists and other allied providers said they were not willing to refer their clients for telepsychology (Perle, Burt, & Higgins, 2014). When investigated further, a lack of self-efficacy has been evident in psychologists’ reasons for not utilizing telepsychology in their practices, as many cited insufficient opportunities for training as a major stumbling block in their willingness to go forward with telepsychology in their practices (Perry, Gold, & Shearer, 2020).
In addition to intrapsychic barriers like bias and low self-efficacy, there have been many environmental barriers for those desiring to implement telepsychology. One example of an obstacle is federal security laws such as HIPAA. While enacted to protect patient privacy, in effect it limited options for telepsychology, as it precluded the use of common telecommunication applications like Skype and Facetime for the provision of telepsychology (APA, 2014). Medicare regulations are another example, as they laid out specific reimbursement qualification stipulations for telehealth sessions. For example, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, patients were required to be in a Medicare-designated rural area and at a Medicare-specified medical treatment center in order for practitioners to receive reimbursement from Medicare for telemedicine visits. Accordingly, the American Medical Association reported that only .25% of Medicare patients received telehealth treatment (O’Reilly, 2019). State laws and regulations have also been limiters in the adoption of telepsychology; for example, most states require that the psychologist be licensed in the same state both they and the client are in at the time of treatment. Apart from legal regulations, the settings in which psychologists practice may restrict the implementation of telepsychology (Pierce, Perrin, & McDonald, 2020a) because policies and guidance on implementation are nonexistent, or there is no appropriate equipment or space available. Even when clinical settings have procured the necessary technology, technical issues on either the clinician’s or patient’s end can hinder willingness to use telepsychology.
Current Study

The flexibility and adaptability of telehealth and telepsychology services have been touted as an important part of crisis response plans, as telehealth allows professionals to provide services to hot zones rapidly or without having to be there in person at all (Darkins, 2016; Tadmor et al., 2006). This allows for efficient deployment of services when and where they are needed. The use of technology to conduct remote telepsychology sessions has very likely become more widespread because of the mandated social distancing imposed by authorities in an effort to reduce the transmission of COVID-19. The pandemic has even coincided with what some have called a “telemedicine revolution” (Perrin, Pierce, et al., 2020, p. 1), although no research to date has examined precisely how the use of telepsychology by psychologists has changed during the pandemic, nor what variables may account for the change in use. As a result, the purpose of this study was to examine (a) the amount of psychologists’ telepsychology use before the COVID-19 pandemic, during the pandemic, and anticipated use after the pandemic; as well as (b) the demographic, training, policy, and clinical practice predictors of these changes. To remain consistent with Medicare’s expanded definition during the pandemic, within the current study, “telepsychology” was defined as “the use of real-time audio (e.g., telephone) and/or video conferencing technology to provide psychological services.” It was hypothesized that telepsychology use would increase dramatically during the pandemic relative to before the pandemic, and that this increase in use would lead psychologists to anticipate continuing to use telepsychology at higher rates after the pandemic relative to baseline, though less than during the pandemic. The results of a previous study (Pierce et al., 2020a) suggested that age, gender, race/ethnicity, supportive policies, receiving training, and population density accounted for 29.8% of the variance in psychologists’ telepsychology use. The results also indicated that setting and treatment focus accounted for 5.3% and 13.1% (respectively) of the variance. These findings informed the variables chosen as predictors in the current study.
Method

Participants
Potential psychologist participants were recruited using e-mail addresses from directories of professional organizations, counseling center and mental health clinic websites, and psychology newsgroups. Eligibility requirements were that participants had to be: (a) licensed to practice as a psychologist in the United States, (b) age 18 or older, and (c) currently practicing (seeing patients) as a psychologist in the United States. Data were collected from May 11, 2020, to May 25, 2020. Initial and follow-up e-mail invitations were sent to 27,324 individuals, 3,897 of which were returned as “undeliverable,” and resulting in 3,694 participants who opened the survey. Of this number, 184 participants left after viewing the information sheet or indicated their refusal to provide informed consent, while 541 participants abandoned the survey at various points without completing it. Among the remainder, 198 individuals were not eligible to participate because they were not currently licensed or treating patients, and 127 were not included after refusing to answer demographic questions (e.g., age, years in practice). Finally, 25 participants’ data were excluded from analysis after they provided nonsensical responses to the validity check question (“In one sentence or less, what do you think the purpose of this study was?”), years of practice being equal to or less than the participant’s reported age, or years of practice reported indicating the psychologist started practicing prior to age 18. These exclusions resulted in a final sample of 2,619 licensed, currently practicing psychologists and an 11.18% completed response rate.
Psychologists in this sample had an average age of 57.29 years with 35.4% identifying as men and 64.2% as women. These closely resembled APA membership demographics (57.8 years, 41.4% men, and 57.8% women; APA, 2018). The average number of years in practice was 24.22, with most individuals having an individual practice (54.4%) in a suburban (46.9%) or urban (43.9%) setting. Full sample demographics appear in Table 1.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Summary of Participant Characteristics
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Measures
In addition to demographic data about themselves, their practice location and setting, and treatment foci, participants were asked to provide responses regarding their telepsychology use, training, and organizational policies relative to January 20, 2020, when the first COVID-19 case was confirmed in the United States. Medicaid and Medicare define “telemedicine” as “two-way, real time interactive communication between the patient, and the physician or practitioner at the distant site” (United States Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2019). Medicare also makes further distinction between telehealth visits which they specify use audio and video communication between the provider and the patient. Communication using telephone only is termed a “virtual check-in” (United States Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2020). The United States Drug Enforcement Administration limits this definition of telemedicine even further to only include health care facilitated by real-time, two-way, audio/video interactions between the practitioner and their patients (United States Drug Enforcement Administration Diversion Control Division, 2019). To remain consistent with this trend and, in particular, the expansion of telepsychology reimbursement during the pandemic under Medicare, telepsychology was defined to participants as the use of real-time audio (e.g., telephone) and/or video conferencing technology to provide psychological services.
The researcher-generated telepsychology questions used were: (a) “What percentage of your patient treatment is provided using telepsychology?” with answers ranging from 0%-100%; (b) “I have been trained well to use telepsychology,” with a 7-point, Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (Strongly Disagree) to 7 (Strongly Agree); and (c) “My organizational policies support telepsychology,” measured on the same Likert-type scale. For all three questions, participants responded three times with regard to the following prompts: (a) “Before the COVID-19 pandemic began in the U.S. on January 20, 2020”; (b) “During the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S.”; and (c) “Your anticipated perspective or behaviors after the COVID-19 pandemic ends in the U.S.” The amount of change for the current primary analyses was determined by subtracting participants’ responses about their telepsychology use before the pandemic from their answers during the pandemic.
Procedure
Potential participants were sent a recruitment e-mail inviting them to complete a 10-min survey that would “help inform treatment approaches used during the pandemic, as well as public healthcare policy.” To avoid biasing enrollment based on preconceived notions of telepsychology, no reference to telepsychology was made in the recruitment e-mail. Additionally, all potential participants received a reminder e-mail one week after the initial invitation was sent. If the providers elected to participate, they had to agree to an informed consent document before being directed to the Qualtrics web platform and screened for eligibility. Participants completed a number of demographic questions about themselves and their practice, read the telepsychology definition used in this survey, and then answered the questions about telepsychology.
Data Analysis
All analyses were conducted using SPSS (Version 26.0). Significance was established at an alpha level of .05, two-tailed. A repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted in which the predictor variable was time (3 levels: before the COVID-19 pandemic, during the pandemic, and projected after the pandemic), and the criterion variable was percentage of clinical work performed via telepsychology.
Then, four ANOVAs were conducted examining the effects of primary treatment setting on (a) prepandemic percentage of clinical work performed via telepsychology, (b) that percentage during pandemic, (c) that percentage projected after the pandemic, and (d) change from percentage of clinical work performed via telepsychology before the pandemic to the percentage during the pandemic. These ANOVAs included only participants who worked in primary treatment settings selected by 25 or more participants, and participants who chose the “other” designation were excluded. For these four ANOVAs only, this resulted in not including participants who worked in correctional facilities, geriatric facilities, psychiatric hospitals, rehabilitation centers, residential treatment centers, or other practice settings.
Finally, two multiple regression analyses were conducted to examine the statistical effects of (a) participant demographics, change in workplace telepsychology policy, change in telepsychology training, practice geographic area, and (b) treatment focus on the change in the percentage of clinical work conducted via telepsychology before relative to during the COVID-19 pandemic. In both regressions, the criterion variable was the percentage of clinical work conducted via telepsychology during the pandemic minus the percentage conducted via telepsychology before the pandemic. The first model’s predictors included age, gender (1 = woman, 0 = man or transgender or nonbinary), race/ethnicity (1 = White/European American, 0 = racial/ethnic minority), the relative change in perceived organizational support via telepsychology policies, relative change in perceived levels of telepsychology training received, and the geographic area type where the practice was located (1 = rural vs. 0 = urban or suburban). The second model’s predictors included dummy-coded variables representing a variety of issues and diagnoses the psychologists’ treated within their practice.
Results

Changes in Telepsychology Use Over Time
The repeated-measures ANOVA examining the effects of time on the percentage of clinical work performed via telepsychology was statistically significant, F(2, 2617) = 8254.01, p < .001, partial eta-squared = .863, a very large-sized effect. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, psychologists performed 7.07% (SD = 14.86) of their clinical work with telepsychology, 85.53% (SD = 29.24) during the pandemic, and a projected 34.96% (SD = 28.35) after the pandemic. These changes represent a more than 12-fold increase in percentage telepsychology use during the pandemic relative to before the pandemic.
Additionally, 45.70% of psychologists reported not using telepsychology at all before the pandemic, with 84.99% reporting using it for 0–10% of their clinical work. Conversely, during the pandemic, 96.45% of psychologists reported using telepsychology in their practice, with 6.61% reporting using it for 0–10% of their clinical work; 67.32% of psychologists reported going completely virtual during the pandemic, with 77.63% reporting using telepsychology for 90–100% of their clinical practice. After the pandemic, 89.19% of psychologists anticipated using telepsychology in their clinical practice (though at just over one third of clinical work).
Primary Practice Setting
The results of the series of one-way ANOVAs comparing the percentage of telepsychology use and change in that percentage by psychologists’ primary practice settings appear in Table 2.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Percentage Use of Telepsychology by Primary Practice Setting
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Before the COVID-19 pandemic, psychologists in Veterans Affairs (VA) medical centers and individual practices had the highest percentage use of telepsychology. Psychologists in outpatient treatment facilities and academic medical centers reported the lowest. During the pandemic, psychologists in group and individual practices had the highest percentage use, although that use was only higher than the lowest percentage group, psychologists in a hospital/medical practice. The largest increase in percentage telepsychology use during the pandemic occurred in group practice, particularly relative to the low percentage increases in hospital/medical practice and VA medical centers. However, in terms of fold increase, psychologists in outpatient treatment facilities reported over a 26-fold increase, followed by psychologists in an academic medical center who reported over a 23-fold increase; by contrast, psychologists in VA medical centers only reported just over a sevenfold increase. After the pandemic, there were no statistical differences between groups, although in terms of the means, psychologists in VA medical centers projected that they would use telepsychology the most in their practice.
Demographics, Training, and Organizational Policies
The first multiple regression provided a statistically significant prediction of change in telepsychology use during the COVID-19 pandemic relative to before, F(6, 2612) = 34.94, p < .001, R2 = .074, a small-sized effect. When controlling for the other predictors, women increased their telepsychology use by 5.8% more than men or transgender/nonbinary individuals (p < .001). Psychologists practicing in rural locations increased their telepsychology use 4.1% less than psychologists practicing in urban or suburban locations (p = .046). Each whole increment increase in telepsychology training rating points resulted in an additional increase of 3.3% in telepsychology use (p < .001). Each whole increment increase in supportive telepsychology organizational policies rating points resulted in an additional increase of 1.6% in telepsychology use (p < .001). No other predictors exerted a unique effect (Table 3).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Variables in Multiple Regression 1
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Treatment Focus
The last multiple regression provided a statistically significant prediction of change in telepsychology use, F(55, 2563) = 6.30, p < .001, R2 = .119, a medium-sized effect (Table 4).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Significant Variables in Multiple Regression 2
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Psychologists who treated antisocial personality disorder, who performed testing and evaluation, and who worked with rehabilitation populations had the lowest increases in percentage telepsychology use. Conversely, psychologists treating relationship issues, anxiety, and women’s issues had the highest increases in percentage telepsychology use.
Discussion

The current study is among the first to examine United States psychologists’ percentage of clinical work performed via telepsychology before, during, and projected after the COVID-19 pandemic, and to examine demographic, training, policy, and clinical practice predictors of these changes. This study is notable in that it drew data from a large national sample of 2,619 licensed psychologists currently practicing within the United States. Results supported hypotheses that use of telepsychology would significantly increase during the pandemic relative to prepandemic rates, and that psychologists would anticipate continuing to use telepsychology after the pandemic at higher rates than at baseline, though less than during the pandemic. Subsequent analyses also demonstrated the statistical effects of specific demographic, training, policy, and clinical practice characteristics on the change in use of telepsychology, suggesting that psychologists may be differentially able or willing to incorporate it into their own practice.
These findings document an unprecedented shift in the uptake of telepsychology, as rates of utilization increased dramatically during the pandemic. Consistent with previous national research demonstrating low rates of telepsychology use with only about one fifth of practicing psychologists using telepsychology in their practice (Pierce et al., 2020b), psychologists in the current study estimated performing 7.07% of their clinical work with telepsychology before the pandemic. This is in stark comparison to psychologists’ estimates that telepsychology comprised 85.53% of their clinical work during the pandemic, an over 12-fold increase. Moreover, participants projected that 34.96% of their clinical work would be conducted via telepsychology even after the pandemic ceases, reflecting an important shift in attitudes toward the use of telepsychology. This represents a nearly fivefold increase from prepandemic rates, indicating the high likelihood of long-lasting changes in the use of telepsychology even after COVID-19-related concerns are ameliorated. These results serve to illustrate the telemedicine revolution (Perrin, Pierce, et al., 2020, p. 1) occurring with practice, policy, and attitudes toward telepsychology during the COVID-19 pandemic. Psychologists reported increasing the percentage of their clinical work via telepsychology at record rates, even within the VHA, where training and infrastructure have been in place for over a decade (Godleski et al., 2012).
These results are also notable because they document the efforts of practicing psychologists to meet the increased mental health needs of the public. Research has already recorded increases in symptoms of anxiety and depression in the general population during the pandemic (Gao et al., 2020; Qiu et al., 2020), while simultaneously observing decreased access to traditional coping strategies (Harandi et al., 2017) and in-person options for health care (e.g., ACS, 2020; CDC, 2020b). Telepsychology presents an opportunity for psychologists to meet many patients’ mental health needs while supporting efforts to limit virus transmission.
Overall, psychologists in group and individual practices reported the highest percentage use of telepsychology during the pandemic, though these percentages were only statistically different from psychologists in a hospital/medical practice, who reported the lowest percentage use. Psychologists in group practice reported the largest increase in telepsychology use during COVID-19 relative to baseline, with smaller increases in use observed in hospital/medical practice and VA medical centers. Within the VHA, lower change in percentage use was likely due in part to the higher-than-average rates of telepsychology use before COVID-19, and perhaps the level of bureaucracy involved in implementing additional changes relative to more nimble practice settings. These results suggest differential abilities of psychologists to introduce or increase telepsychology practice based on primary practice setting.
Certainly, many commonly cited barriers to telepsychology were addressed on a national scale, such as privacy and security regulations (APA, 2014; OCR, 2020a, 2020b), Medicare reimbursement (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2020), and training (e.g., APA, 2020), which likely impacted the universal increases in percentage of telepsychology use documented here. However, these findings also suggest that psychologists in group practice had access to the support needed to transition to telepsychology in conjunction with fewer procedural obstacles to overcome, and that working within a group practice provided opportunities for psychologists to address remaining environmental and individual barriers to uptake. For example, while psychologists have previously reported concerns about ease of telepsychology use (Pierce et al., 2020b), access to other practitioners within the group and/or administrative personnel may have increased the likelihood that typical concerns were readily addressed, particularly if a colleague was already using telepsychology. Further, new policies and guidance on telepsychology may have been more quickly and easily implemented within a group practice in comparison to a hospital system or VA medical center, where the more complex policy-making infrastructure may have slowed implementation.
Results also supported previous research findings (Pierce et al., 2020a) that uptake of telepsychology during the pandemic would relate to several demographic variables. Woman-identified gender, nonrural practice setting, increased organizational policies supporting telepsychology, and increased training in telepsychology were all associated with increases in percentage of telepsychology use. Age and race/ethnicity were not associated with changes in telepsychology service provision. Despite the lack of age effects, the mean age and experience of the sample indicate that many participants probably trained in an era with less video conferencing technology; therefore many of these psychologists likely learned this approach and adapted rapidly during the demands of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These findings have several important implications. First, the finding that psychologists who self-identified as women showed greater increases in percentage of telepsychology suggest that gender role variables may have affected these changes. For example, given that women tend to provide the majority of childcare (Bianchi, Sayer, Milkie, & Robinson, 2012), woman-identifying psychologists with children may have experienced a greater need to increase telepsychology use in order to facilitate provision of care at home after schools and childcare options were closed. Psychologists in rural locations may have experienced a lower demand for telepsychology, as initial rates of COVID-19 cases were generally higher in more populated states (CDC, 2020a). Previous research indicates rural psychologists have been less likely to use telepsychology within their practice (Pierce et al., 2020a). With that in mind, rural psychologists eager to offer their expertise to help areas more severely affected by the pandemic may experience the added benefit of filling openings within their schedules (Centore & Milacci, 2008). Rural psychologists or their patients may also have had limited access to technology required for telepsychology such as reliable high-speed Internet. The findings regarding training and policies underscore the importance of adequate organizational support in addressing both environmental and intrapsychic barriers to telepsychology use. This is reinforced by the finding that psychologists in VA medical centers reported higher percentage use before COVID-19 than psychologists in all other primary practice settings except individual practice, given VHA’s history of telepsychology infrastructure and accessibility of training (e.g., Caver et al., 2020).
Finally, the current study explored therapeutic issues and diagnoses associated with increased telepsychology use during the pandemic in comparison to telepsychology use prior to the pandemic. These results suggested that some presenting concerns may be less amenable to clinical work via telepsychology, or that psychologists treating these issues experienced greater concerns about the use of telepsychology. It should be noted that while the overall regression model uncovered a medium-sized effect, the unique effects within the model were quite small and should be interpreted through that lens. The findings might suggest that psychologists believe that complex or severe symptomatology such as antisocial personality disorder, behavioral issues, and bipolar disorder may be more difficult to treat via telepsychology or may require specialized training for psychologists to feel comfortable adapting treatment to telepsychology; psychologists may also be reluctant to treat these issues via telepsychology because of perceived safety concerns. Traumatic brain injury and physical medicine and rehabilitation may be difficult to treat via telepsychology because of the need to coordinate care with in-person services like medical examinations and physical therapy. Testing and evaluation were also associated with lower increases in telepsychology uptake, which could indicate limited access to tests adapted for telepsychology use and concerns regarding test security. In contrast, anxiety, relationship difficulties, sleep/insomnia, and women’s issues were associated with greater increases in telepsychology uptake. To some extent, this finding may be impacted by increased rates of problems in these areas related to COVID-19 and therefore to increased demand for services. However, these results also suggest that these issues may be particularly amenable to treatment via telepsychology or that psychologists are more open to providing services for these concerns using telepsychology.
Clinical and Training Implications
The substantial changes in percentage of telepsychology use observed in the current study suggest that many of the previously documented barriers to telepsychology have been addressed, at least on a temporary basis, either by procedural changes or by the immediate needs of patients and providers during the COVID-19 pandemic. While some facilitating changes may be short-lived, these results also show that psychologists plan to continue using telepsychology at greater rates in the future relative to before the pandemic, suggesting important shifts in attitudes toward the use of telepsychology. Adequate training in telepsychology and supportive organizational policies and procedures appear to be an important component in increasing use, and are likely to continue to be a crucial factor in maintaining telepsychology use after risks of in-person health care associated with COVID-19 have lessened. A number of training resources exist, including trainings and tools published through the APA (e.g., APA, 2020), VHA, and others. In terms of training, it is surprising that psychologists within academic settings were not using telepsychology more often prior to the pandemic, and that they anticipated after the pandemic that they would be using it less than psychologists within individual practice, group practice, hospitals, and VA medical centers. Students enrolled in professional psychology training programs may benefit from access to information and training with telepsychology as an integral part of the curriculum.
These findings also highlight factors associated with less substantial increases in telepsychology use that could serve as targets for future interventions to support telepsychology uptake. This study found that woman-identifying psychologists and those in nonrural primary practice settings were most likely to increase telepsychology use. Future research could explore in greater detail barriers to uptake in psychologists who identified as men, transgender, or nonbinary, as well as psychologists in rural practice settings, and additional training or supportive policy changes could be implemented to address these discrepancies if appropriate. Moreover, future interventions and research could be targeted at clinical issues associated with lower rates of uptake; for example, the findings regarding testing and evaluation suggest a need for valid computer adapted assessments that patients can complete from their homes without violating administration norms or test security practices.
Limitations and Future Directions
The findings from the current study should be interpreted within the context of several limitations. The observational nature of the study precludes causal inferences about patterns in telepsychology use and uptake. Thus, although the study found demographic and practice-related predictors of increases in rate of telepsychology use, these variables are not necessarily causally related. Also, the recruitment method resulted in an 11.18% rate of completed response. Although this is typical for completion rates for emailed web survey invitations (Liu & Wronski, 2018; Petrovčič, Petrič, & Lozar Manfreda, 2016) and the sample demographics closely mirrored APA membership demographics (APA, 2018), there may be meaningful difference between those who opted to participate and those who did not. A large number of participants were excluded due to not providing informed consent, not completing the survey, or providing invalid answers to survey questions. Since the survey did not collect identifiable information (e.g., e-mail address, IP addresses) or use digital cookies to track and store progress, participants were required to complete the survey all at once, rather than saving progress to return later. Therefore, a substantial number of those not included (541 participants) may have abandoned the survey to attend to something else or experienced technical issues. Although no mention of telepsychology was made in the recruitment e-mail, it could be that those individuals who started but did not complete the survey differed in some way from other participants on views of telepsychology or psychotherapy practice. Also, there was small representation in the sample from psychologists practicing within correctional facilities, geriatric facilities, psychiatric hospitals, rehabilitation centers, and residential treatment centers. These settings typically have higher levels of in-person contact with the population they treat since their patients often reside on site. The study would have greatly benefited from the views of psychologists working within these environments.
Since data for the current study were collected in May 2020 during the first wave of the pandemic, additional research is needed to determine whether the results will hold if the pandemic persists for longer than originally projected, or if additional waves of positive cases occur. For example, if the United States continues to experience high rates of positive cases in the absence of a widely available vaccine or effective treatments, it is possible that rates of telepsychology use may continue to increase, as patients may feel that they can no longer wait to access services.
The survey questions did not ask participants to differentiate between their use of video-conferencing and telephone in the definition of telepsychology (“real-time audio (e.g., telephone) and/or video conferencing technology”), which was consistent with CMS definitions. Some psychologists may have communicated answers differently based on each delivery method, so future research should not only document rates of telepsychology use, but also nuances therein such as delivery methods and type of clinical work performed (e.g., psychotherapy vs. assessment). Although age was not revealed to be a significant predictor of change in telepsychology use during the pandemic, there may have been differences between younger and older participants in the type of telepsychology they use. These analyses also did not examine participants’ level of competency with telepsychology or ask about specific content within any training they have received. Future studies may consider exploring these topics.
Also, this study was generally conducted from the vantage point that increased adoption of telepsychology is advantageous for the field and the public. As a result, variables were not included that could have shed extensive light on the limitations of telepsychology, such as barriers to adoption, negative feedback reported by patients, impact on clinical care, and so forth. Future research should attempt to assess for variables reflecting the limitations of telepsychology, rather than just its potential. Finally, the current study partly relied on psychologists’ recall of how often they were using telepsychology before the pandemic. Previous research has demonstrated that individuals’ recall of activities and experiences are affected by multiple recall biases (Solhan, Trull, Jahng, & Wood, 2009). Although psychologists were asked about overall telepsychology use just a few months prior, their answers concerning certain activities in their daily practice may have been distorted. Similarly, the current study assessed psychologists’ predictions in the percentage of their future clinical work that would be conducted via telepsychology, future policy impacts on telepsychology are not yet known. For example, it is unclear whether privacy/security regulations will be amended after the pandemic or will revert to prepandemic rules, and whether telepsychology services will continue to be reimbursed at rates comparable to in-person services. These policy changes may have substantial impacts on psychologists’ availability and attitudes toward offering telepsychology, even as self-efficacy and ease of use may increase over time. Additionally, ongoing research is necessary to evaluate the impact of these policy decisions on psychologists’ service delivery in order to ensure that the mental health needs of the general public are adequately met.",
"7": "Millions of people with a diagnosable mental disorder within the United States do not have adequate access to trained mental health professionals. Areas classified as rural contain an estimated 60 million people (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018), while most psychologists, social workers, and psychiatrists work within the wealthier neighborhoods of population-dense cities (Kazdin & Blase, 2011; U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2013). Furthermore, states with higher proportions of individuals with a mental illness also have a smaller proportion of psychologists to treat them (American Psychological Association [APA], 2014). This limits access to treatment for millions of people unable to attend in-person sessions with competent mental health professionals. The U.S. Health Resources & Services Administration (2020) reports that 112 million people are living within areas with a shortage of mental health providers and services.
Telepsychology can be an important piece of the puzzle as psychologists attempt to reach people for whom time, distance, or situation are barriers to receiving traditional in-person psychotherapy. The APA (2015) defines telepsychology as providing psychological services through the use of technology. Although this can include the use of text, chat, e-mail, telephone, virtual reality, or even websites providing self-help information (Chester & Glass, 2006; Murphy & Mitchell, 1998), this article will focus solely on the delivery of psychotherapy through the use of videoconferencing technology.
Numerous studies indicate telepsychology can be as effective as in-person interventions. Backhaus et al. (2012) conducted a meta-analysis of 65 research articles comparing interventions delivered via telepsychology with the same interventions delivered in person. Their results suggested that interventions using telepsychology were comparable to in-person psychotherapy in regards to patient satisfaction, symptom outcomes, and feasibility across a diverse sample (Backhaus et al., 2012). Equivalency in effectiveness was also observed by researchers conducting a meta-analysis of 24 randomized controlled noninferiority trials comparing telepsychology with in-person interventions for disorders such as depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and adjustment disorder (Varker, Brand, Ward, Terhaag, & Phelps, 2019). It is important to note that a majority of the studies evaluating the efficacy of telepsychology utilize some form of behavior or exposure therapy and focus on treating symptoms of depression, anxiety, or PTSD. With that said, there are a variety of other treatments that have been successfully delivered via videoconferencing, suggesting that it can be broadly used to treat a range of patients (K. E. Anderson, Byrne, Crosby, & Le Grange, 2017) and with a range of approaches (Kobak, Lipsitz, Markowitz, & Bleiberg, 2017). The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has sustained a long commitment to telehealth and telepsychology to reach veterans across the country and has even developed their own telehealth platforms (VA, 2020).
Although many psychologists may prefer to meet with their clients in person for every session, making this a requirement may reduce access to treatment. People with very limited time, restricted travel options, physical impairments, impaired cognition, or the inability to transfer caregiving responsibilities to others may have to forgo traditional in-person sessions (Savege Scharff & Martin, 2018). Considering the rich body of research suggesting a reciprocal relationship between mental and physical health (Cacioppo & Berntson, 2012; Dantzer, 2018; Herbert & Cohen, 1993), the traditional in-person requirement for mental health services places an unfair mental and physical toll on entire communities. A potential benefit that telepsychology may offer is the potential to mitigate these issues and enable psychologists to regularly meet with clients where they already are (Savege Scharff & Martin, 2018). Telepsychology can also increase access to psychologists with experience and training with a particular diagnosis, relevant cultural competency, or fluency in the client’s preferred language (Hailey, Roine, & Ohinmaa, 2008; Yellowlees, Marks, Hilty, & Shore, 2008). While states such as Texas, North Carolina, and Kansas have large, ethnically diverse populations living in rural areas, relying solely on in-person interventions could limit access to competent care (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016). Rather than depending on the particular competencies of practitioners within a reasonable driving distance, a person using telepsychology could potentially access any licensed psychologist within their state. Additionally, a federal rule in 2018 allowed VA-connected patients to access any VA health care providers, including psychologists, located across the country (VA, 2018). This allows VA-connected patients to receive care from providers in other states and even allows patients to receive care within their own home by using the VA Video Connect system. This change has the potential to expand the provision of highly specialized services to a greater percentage of veterans across the country regardless of their location and their ability to travel to a facility offering the health care services they need.
The APA (2015) released a set of standards to guide psychologists engaging in telepsychology. Many of these are extensions of previous standards but have additional requirements for delivering psychological services using technology. For example, psychologists not only need competency using and gauging the appropriateness of interventions but also must develop competency with the technology used to deliver the interventions. These standards are vital as a guide for psychologists, but the added complexities they add are important to consider when evaluating telepsychology’s place within a practice. This may mean some psychologists are deterred by the need to gain a basic proficiency using computer networks, experience with specific telecommunications equipment such as digital cameras and microphones, and competency using the software connecting them with their clients during sessions (APA, 2015). Since access and proficiency with technology can greatly vary between clients, Wells et al. (2020) suggest scheduling a pretreatment session and building in additional time for appointments to handle technical issues and to determine alternate plans when available technology is insufficient. See Wells et al. (2020) for an excellent review of technical and practical issues to consider, as well as suggestions to address them. Furthermore, psychologists should also know if the populations they treat, and the methods they use, have been empirically demonstrated as appropriate and compatible with telepsychology. Additionally, psychologists may be concerned about shouldering additional risks to confidentiality associated with transmitting data over public networks and meaningfully informing their clients of these risks. Finally, a suitable plan must be in place in the event the network connection fails or when a client is in crisis, including knowledge of emergency services and important contacts within the client’s area (APA, 2015).
Adding to the list of potential telepsychology deterrents, reimbursement for telepsychology sessions from public health care programs and health insurance providers can be difficult. For example, in 2016, Blue Cross Blue Shield only reimbursed for telepsychology visits if the psychologist was a member of an online provider’s network (Blue Cross Blue Shield, 2016). Until recently, Medicare would cover telehealth and telepsychology visits only if the client lived in a designated rural area and the session occurred within a health care facility. In 2019, the requirements were modified to allow telepsychology sessions when the client is at home if they are receiving treatment for substance abuse or a co-occurring mental health disorder. Additionally, starting in 2020, Medicare Advantage Plans may also cover telepsychology treatment no matter where the client is located (U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2020a). To increase access to vital care services, states such as Arizona and California have passed legislation requiring insurers cover telepsychology visits, although there are often differences in the specifics (California Insurance Code, 2011; Telemedicine Reimbursement Parity Act, 2016).
The increased risk of unknowingly practicing across state lines (i.e., interjurisdictional practice) that comes with telepsychology can also be an issue. The client’s location during the session, and not that of the psychologist, determines which state’s laws are applicable (Kramer, Kinn, & Mishkind, 2015). If a client is traveling out of state but fails to inform the psychologist, the psychologist may be practicing without a license unless they meet the interjurisdictional requirements of the state where the client is located (Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, 2020). Even when the psychologist is notified that a patient is in a different state, the laws and requirements can vary greatly between states. Researching and complying with these differences between states could be particularly burdensome for psychologists treating patients who frequently travel to various states.
Also, among the list of potential deterrents is that technological issues with the equipment and network infrastructure used for telepsychology can interfere with interactions during sessions. Network latency (i.e., lag) creating delays of 500 ms or more can negatively impact the conversation (Tam, Carter, Kiesler, & Hodgins, 2012), as both individuals are more likely to inadvertently talk over one another or experience longer than usual pauses during the conversation (Kurita, Lai, & Kitawaki, 1994). Also, if one party’s microphone is picking up the audio signal from speakers, the other party can have significant trouble speaking while hearing their own voice played back to them with a significant delay (i.e., delayed auditory feedback; Yates, 1963). Furthermore, camera placement can impact the interpersonal experience. It is common to position cameras above the video screen, but this causes each participant to see the other participant looking down rather than making eye contact. To address this, a number of gaze correction solutions have been developed, but they can be expensive and introduce distracting or even disturbing video artifacts such as flickering seams around the face as elements of the head image are shifted (Chen, 2002; Khan, Li, & ur Réhman, 2016; Kuster, Popa, Bazin, Gotsman, & Gross, 2012). This may be especially problematic when utilizing psychodynamic approaches relying on the therapist’s ability to carefully create a setting and situation in which the patient can openly express themselves (Essig & Russell, 2017; Savege Scharff & Tao, 2018).
Previous research has examined the concerns and training needs of psychologists and doctoral psychology students. Within a sample obtained by Perle, Burt, and Higgins (2014), 74.1% of psychologists indicated they were not likely to refer anyone for telepsychology. Participants indicated that they were most concerned about information regarding ethics, legal issues, evidence of effectiveness, strategies for crisis management, reimbursement, costs, and setup. Further research also revealed mental health providers’ adoption of evidence-based practice is influenced by practice setting and organizational culture (Aarons, 2004), age, race/ethnicity, and gender (Aarons et al., 2010).
In early 2020, authorities within the Chinese health system notified the World Health Organization (WHO) that they had detected a new virus strain, termed “COVID-19,” among their population (WHO, 2020a). On January 20, 2020, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirmed that a patient in Seattle, Washington, who had recently visited China had tested positive for COVID-19 (Holshue et al., 2020). Within a few weeks, more than 118,00 individuals testing positive for COVID-19 had been detected worldwide, leading WHO to declare the virus a global pandemic (WHO, 2020b). In response to anticipated health care needs and to facilitate social distancing to slow transmission rates, multiple agencies within the United States adjusted key policies to promote the use of telehealth and telepsychology to meet demand for services. The Office for Civil Rights within the Department of Health and Human Services suspended the Privacy Rule within the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act that had previously prevented the use of several commonly used teleconferencing platforms such as Skype and FaceTime (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2020a, 2020b). Medicare and Medicaid temporarily adjusted their policy to reimburse all telehealth and telepsychology visits at the same rate as in-person visits, as well as allowing telepsychology visits within patients’ homes (U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2020b). Health care providers such as Johns Hopkins (Nitkin, 2020), Mayo Clinic (Stiepan, 2020), and the VA (2020) announced policy changes to promote and meet the unprecedented need for telehealth and telepsychology services.
Psychologists exploring the possibility of telepsychology within their practice have quite a bit to consider. Among these concerns are efficacy, legal issues, organizational policies, additional training, client safety, reimbursement, telepsychology’s potential impact on the therapeutic relationship, and the financial costs that come with it (Perle et al., 2014). Examining these complex and interrelated issues may help explain why, before the COVID-19 pandemic, an estimated 80% of psychologists had never used telepsychology. Building on previous research examining the concerns and training needs of psychologists (Perle et al., 2014), the purpose of this study is to collect and categorize a comprehensive list of telepsychology deterrents identified by psychologists not currently using it before the COVID-19 pandemic and then identify significant practice and demographic predictors of psychologists’ reported concerns about telepsychology. The current study is a secondary data analysis using data from a previous study examining theoretical models predicting psychologists’ use of telepsychology (Pierce, Perrin, & McDonald, 2020).
Method

Participants
Eligibility requirements for participants were that they (a) were 18 years or older, (b) were licensed to practice psychology in at least one state within the United States, (c) were currently practicing psychology, (d) had earned a doctoral degree, and (e) were not currently using telepsychology within their practice. A recruitment list was compiled using online rosters of professional organizations (e.g., APA), psychology newsgroups (e.g., Society for Military Psychology, Society for Counseling Psychology), and publicly available information provided on mental health provider websites. The list included 28,276 names and e-mail addresses of individuals who were potentially practicing within the United States as a psychologist. Data were collected between July 6, 2017, through July 26, 2017. E-mailed invitations to the list resulted in undeliverable notifications from 16.1% of the list, while delivered invitations led to 2,138 (9.0%) of individuals completing the survey. This rate of response aligns with previous research examining response rates and completion rates for e-mailed web surveys (Liu & Wronski, 2018; Petrovčič, Petrič, & Lozar Manfreda, 2016). This study was reviewed by the Virginia Commonwealth University Independent Review Board to ensure it was conducted ethically and in compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations concerning research involving human participants. Survey answers were reviewed to find meaningless answers to free response items, unlikely responses, and impossible answers. Two responses were discarded because the entered years in practice and stated age suggested the respondent started practicing at or before age 2. Another 347 survey responses were discarded based on blank or meaningless answers to a final free-response validity check question. This question was used to detect participants who were providing quick and nonsensical answers to reach the end. One record was discarded since the respondent indicated they were only licensed to practice outside of the United States. Finally, 389 respondents indicated they were currently using telepsychology within their practice. This resulted in a sample of 1,400 participants (see Table 1)
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Summary of Participant Characteristics
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
with representation from each state and Washington, DC.
Procedure
Invitations to participate were e-mailed directly to a list of potential participants. The invitation explained why they were invited to participate, a brief description of the study’s purpose, the criteria for participant inclusion, and an HTML link. Recruits who clicked on the HTML link were taken to a page with more details about the study, institutional review board information, methods for contacting the authors, and an informed consent form. Once the recruits consented to the study, they were taken to an online survey designed using the Qualtrics (2017) platform. The first four questions asked participants to verify that they were over 18 years of age, have a doctorate in psychology, are licensed to practice psychology somewhere within the United States, and are currently practicing as psychologists. Before continuing, they were presented with the following statement, “For the purpose of this survey, ‘telepsychology’ refers the use of video conferencing technology to provide psychotherapy.” The remainder of the survey asked them to provide demographic data about themselves, information about their practice, and details about their concerns, attitudes, and perceptions concerning telepsychology. As a final check for validity, participants were asked to provide a response the question, “In one sentence or less, what do you think the purpose of this study was?”
Measures
Demographics
Survey items recorded participant responses concerning their age, years in practice as a psychologist, the number of psychologists in their place of practice, their theoretical approach to psychotherapy, if they currently use telepsychology, the primary focus on their practice (e.g., eating disorders, addiction, depression, family conflict, racial identity), the states they are licensed to practice within, and the density of the community (urban, suburban, or rural setting). Race/ethnicity was indicated by selecting from a predefined a list of forced choices comprising White/European American (non-Latino/non-Hispanic), Black/African American (non-Latino/non-Hispanic), Latino/Hispanic, Asian/Asian American (non-Latino/non-Hispanic), American Indian/Alaska Native/Native American, multiracial/multiethnic, and “other.” The item capturing theoretical approach responses offered a list of forced choices, including Acceptance and Commitment, Cognitive Behavioral, Existential, Family Systems, Feminist, Gestalt, Individual/Adlerian, Interpersonal, Jungian, Narrative, Person-Centered/Rogerian, Psychoanalysis, Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, Reality Therapy, Solution-Focused Therapy, and “other.” Participants who selected “other” were provided a text box and asked, “please specify.”
Deterrents
Participants were asked, “If you DO NOT currently use telepsychology, what led to this decision (select all that apply)? (State laws prohibit its use, Organizational policies prohibit its use, Client Safety/Crisis concerns, Cost, Efficacy, Ethics, Privacy, Legality, Reimbursement, Insufficient training, Other [Please specify]).” Participants were allowed to select multiple items.
Results

Descriptive Analysis
To summarize psychologists’ deterrents to using telepsychology, percentages of psychologists in the sample who endorsed the researcher-provided options were calculated. In order to analyze the responses to the “Other [Please specify]” item, an eight-step qualitative analysis process described by Zhang and Wildemuth (2009) was conducted. The initial set of codes and descriptions were the researcher-provided options listed above. Two raters familiar with the telepsychology literature reviewed the 402 responses to the survey’s “Other [Please specify]” item. The two raters independently sample-coded a random selection of items, frequently consulting the list of codes for guidance. Each rater’s sample or responses was compared with one another and resulted in an interrater reliability of 79.2%. The raters discussed areas for improvement. The descriptors were modified for greater clarity, and three pairs of codes were combined, resulting in the final list of 16 codes (see Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Final List of Deterrents
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
The two raters coded a new random sample of responses and compared results, achieving an acceptable interrater reliability score of 86.6%. The remaining items were coded by each rater while they frequently reviewed the list of codes to maintain consistency. Upon completion, the results were compared. A third person reviewed the responses for which there was disagreement and served as a tiebreaker while also frequently consulting the list of codes and descriptions. These data were combined and analyzed with data obtained from the list of researcher-provided options (see Table 3).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Percentage Endorsed of Each Telepsychology Deterrent
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Logistic Regressions
A series of binary logistic regressions were used to model the most frequently endorsed (20% or more) binary variables of deterrents (with not endorsing the deterrent as the reference category; Table 4).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Variables in Logistic Regressions
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Predictor variables included participant age, as well as binary predictor variables of masculine gender (man), White/European American race/ethnicity, practicing within a rural community, practicing within a VA or medical center, and using cognitive–behavioral therapy (CBT) as a treatment approach to therapy.
Training
The first logistic regression model did not provide a statistically significant prediction of psychologists endorsing insufficient training as a concern, χ2(6) = 9.132, p = .166.
Safety
The second model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing safety as a concern, χ2(6) = 27.193, p < .000. The Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 indicated the model accounted for approximately 2.8% of the total variance. When controlling for the other predictors, the likelihood of endorsing safety as a concern for psychologists who did not use telepsychology was lower for cisgender men, White psychologists, practitioners within a VA or medical center, and those using a CBT approach. No other predictors exerted a unique effect on endorsing safety as a concern.
Privacy
The third model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing privacy as a concern, χ2(6) = 33.722, p < .001, Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 = .035. The likelihood of endorsing privacy as a concern was lower for cisgender men, those practicing within a rural community, and those practicing within a VA or medical center.
Legal issues
The fourth model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing legal issues as a concern, χ2(6) = 19.546, p = .003, Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 = .021. The likelihood of endorsing legal issues as a concern was lower for older psychologists, those practicing within a rural community, and those who practiced within a VA or medical center.
Ethics
The fifth model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing ethical issues as a concern, χ2(6) = 22.284, p = .001, Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 = .023. The likelihood of endorsing ethics as a concern was lower for those practicing within a VA or medical center.
Reimbursement
The sixth model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing reimbursement as a concern, χ2(6) = 15.123, p = .019, Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 = .016. The likelihood of endorsing reimbursement as a concern was lower for older psychologists.
Efficacy
The seventh model provided a statistically significant prediction of endorsing efficacy as a concern, χ2(6) = 49.573, p < .001, Nagelkerke pseudo-R2 = .054. The likelihood of endorsing efficacy as a concern was higher for older psychologists but lower for those practicing within a VA or medical center and those using a CBT approach.
Discussion

The purpose of this study was to collect and categorize the concerns psychologists have regarding telepsychology and to examine demographic and practice characteristics that predict psychologists’ endorsement of those concerns. This is important for mental health since telepsychology has the potential for reaching people in need of mental health services but who are limited by time, distance, or circumstances from attending in-person sessions. While many hospitals and health care institutions within the United States have adopted telehealth of some kind (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2016), prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, an overwhelming majority of practicing psychologists did not offer telepsychology as an option for their clients (Perle et al., 2014; Pierce, Perrin, & McDonald, 2020). This study helps clarify the most important deterrents psychologists face when considering telepsychology within their own practice.
The results indicate that psychologists not using telepsychology primarily chose not to do so because they believed the effectiveness of treatment would be diminished and that they had concerns about exposing their clients to increased risks. These concerns included receiving insufficient training to be effective with telepsychology, ensuring the client’s safety or addressing the needs of remote clients in crisis, protecting the privacy of clients, considering ethical issues that could result from using telepsychology, and being uncertain about the effectiveness of treatment when not conducted in person. Among less frequently endorsed concerns were understanding and addressing legal complexities, reimbursement concerns, organizational barriers, a perceived lack of demand, and the additional financial costs or time commitment that could result from telepsychology adoption. The large proportion of individuals citing concerns about legal and reimbursement issues suggests that advocacy efforts to examine and adjust these systemic issues could result in more frequent use of telepsychology when it is appropriate. In this light, it is not surprising these barriers were recognized and addressed by swift federal changes to policy in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The results suggest that psychologists practicing within medical centers or VA facilities were less likely to endorse safety, privacy, legal issues, ethics, and efficacy as concerns when compared to psychologists in other settings. The adoption rate of telehealth (the use of technology to deliver health care services) within hospitals has been increasing over the past several years (Huilgol, Miron-Shatz, Joshi, & Hollander, 2020). The VA reports more than 2 million telehealth visits occurred during the fiscal year of 2016 (VA, 2017). As psychologists see their colleagues use this option to treat clients, it is reasonable that they would have diminished concerns about its efficacy. Also, VA and medical centers often have carefully crafted, well-communicated policies and guidelines to protect patient privacy and safety. For example, the VA requires practitioners to complete several courses explaining how to use their telehealth platforms, as well as information about legal issues, VA policies, and best practices concerning telehealth visits (Caver et al., 2019). It is understandable that psychologists within these settings would feel more confident that they can address these issues and find answers if necessary. Furthermore, psychologists within a VA setting are operating within a large health care system with its associated resources (e.g., veterans’ crisis line, medical center emergency departments at VA medical centers, suicide prevention coordinators, standardized safety plans, high-risk intervention teams) to address urgent needs as they arise. Finally, federal laws allowing VA psychologists to provide treatment to VA patients regardless of their location within the United States would dampen concerns about legal issues.
Also, older psychologists were less concerned about reimbursement issues and more concerned about the effectiveness of using telepsychology. Predictably, age and years in practice were highly correlated within this sample. It may be that older, more experienced practitioners better understand how to work with insurance providers to ensure they get paid for their services. On the other hand, when compared to younger groups, older individuals have been shown to be less comfortable being open and vulnerable when using online social platforms (Gibson et al., 2010) and are more likely to perceive online relationships as shallow (Jung, Walden, Johnson, & Sundar, 2017; Lehtinen, Näsänen, & Sarvas, 2009). Psychologists possessing these beliefs and attitudes who choose not to use telepsychology may be making a decision based in part on the perceived importance of in-person connections to facilitate interpersonal interactions, therapeutic alliance, and vulnerability. It may be that these fundamental assumptions regarding what needs to happen within the therapy relationship (e.g., alliance), as well as assumptions concerning the ability to achieve these requirements while using telepsychology, may be at the core of the issue for these psychologists. Further studies examining if these assumptions regarding the ideal nature of the therapy relationship can be met using telepsychology, and disseminating the results to practitioners, could have an impact on future use. Also, future studies on receptivity toward telepsychology may consider examining broader attitudes toward social media and online relationships.
Those who engaged in CBT were also less likely to report efficacy and safety as deterrents to adopting telepsychology than psychologists using other approaches to psychotherapy. The lower concerns about efficacy and safety, two sides of the same coin, may be partially accounted for by noting the high number of studies using CBT to examine telepsychology’s effectiveness. A meta-analysis conducted by Varker et al. (2019) reviewing studies of telepsychology’s effectiveness revealed that CBT was the most common approach utilized. As Johnsen and Friborg (2015) suggest, this may be the result of how highly standardized CBT has remained for decades, lending itself well to studies comparing outcomes between groups. On the other hand, it may be that, for some unexamined reason, CBT is simply better suited for telepsychology than other theoretical approaches to psychotherapy. The results may suggest that telepsychology efficacy literature would benefit from future noninferiority studies utilizing a more diverse representation of theoretical approaches.
Finally, among psychologists not using telepsychology, being White was not seen as a consistent predictor of most of the issues raised. Although Whites were statistically less likely to endorse safety as a concern, this result may be spurious considering the fluctuating direction of results across the list of concerns analyzed. Future research may attempt to validate, and if replicated, attempt to understand this result.
Limitations and Future Directions
Although this study provides some insights concerning psychologists’ concerns about telepsychology, it has some limitations to consider. To begin with, the data were gathered before the COVID-19 pandemic. There have been major changes to the environment within which psychologists evaluate telepsychology. The need for social distancing, as well as the adjustment of multiple laws and policies, has led to unprecedented levels of telepsychology and telehealth usage (Pierce, Perrin, Tyler, McKee, & Watson, 2020). As psychologists gain training and experience with telepsychology, it may have a significant impact on their attitudes concerning its effectiveness and appropriateness with the populations they treat. The experience gained during this period can guide organizations and training programs as they develop education for psychologists that takes into account the populations they treat, the setting they practice within, approach, and so on. For example, Wells et al. (2020) provide an excellent overview of lessons learned delivering prolonged exposure therapy using telepsychology during the pandemic. A future follow-up study could survey psychologists to see which, if any, of these barriers or concerns persist and to what degree.
Another limitation is that the sample was skewed on certain factors such as race/ethnicity. There was an overrepresentation of White participants (90.3%) and participants practicing in individual or group practice (65.6%) when compared with the percentage of APA members who are White (84%; Lin, Stamm, & Christidis, 2018) or work in independent practice (K. Stamm, Lin, & Christidis, 2017). The use of Internet-based surveys can be problematic in that they may unintentionally result in a skewed sample of the population. Although steps were taken to ensure participants were engaged throughout the entirety of the survey, and a large sample was obtained, research utilizing Internet surveys faces difficulties when attempting to control who ultimately decides to participate (T. Anderson & Kanuka, 2002; Leary, 2012). Although the sample was sufficient for achieving significance in one category concerning race/ethnicity and treatment setting, the sample lacked sufficient diversity for a more nuanced analysis. The interaction of race/ethnicity and attitudes toward telepsychology are likely to be very complex and may be impacted by individual-, community-, and systems-level factors that are worth exploring but not able to be handled effectively with this study’s data. Further exploration of factors such as the perspectives on telepsychology’s impact on social justice, disparities in resources impacting access, or access to psychologists with greater cultural competence in areas where that may not be available deserve further exploration.
Next, some deterrent categories may be underrepresented. There were four categories added during the qualitative analysis based on typed responses to the “other” category. Although 28.6% of participants did take time to enter items not listed, it is likely these categories would have been endorsed more often had they also been included as an easy to select checklist item. The final list is likely to contain the majority of concerns psychologists have when considering telepsychology and might serve as a guide for future exploration.
An additional limitation is the lack of data from psychologists who do use telepsychology within their practice. Without those data, it is not clear what deterrents vary across the different groups. For example, both groups may have concerns about safety or reimbursements but may vary on prohibitive organizational policies within the institution in which they practice. Future studies could ask about barriers and deterrents for both those who do use telepsychology and those who do not.
A final limitation of this study is that the total variance explained by the logistic regression models ranged between 1.6% and 5.4%. Although most of the models achieved statistical significance, the revealed differences between groups were small. As a result, the interpretation of these results should be tempered.
Conclusion
The study revealed several important deterrents reported by psychologists who are not currently using telepsychology. Insufficient training was endorsed as the most common deterrent to using telepsychology. Providing more information and training resources could potentially encourage more psychologists to consider its use and provide more mental health care access to populations that traditional in-person approaches do not currently reach. In particular, more academic institutions might consider adding training in telepsychology to their programs as they prepare psychologists to meet the public’s mental health needs. Not doing so may unknowingly communicate negative messages concerning its use. The results also suggest that, among psychologists who do not use telepsychology, their concerns slightly vary depending on demographic and practice characteristics. Organizations interested in promoting or implementing telepsychology might benefit from tailoring programs to address specific needs of the psychologists they work with rather than adopting a “one-size-fits-all” solution.",
"8": "The primary focus of COVID-19 has been on its impact on physical health. However, the pandemic has had a multidimensional and multisystem impact on the lives of Canadians and individuals worldwide, from increased family and occupational stress, to increased health anxiety due to fear of illness or contagion (Asmundson & Taylor, 2020), to educational changes (e.g., homeschooling), to job loss and financial insecurity, to lack of essential supplies, fear of infection, loss of resources, supports, and interpersonal connection, and potentially separation and/or death of loved ones (Gruber et al., 2020). Not surprisingly then, one of the largest and most sustained effects of the COVID-19 pandemic is its impact on mental health (Cooke, Eirich, Racine, & Madigan, 2020; Racine, Cooke, et al., 2020) and, by extension, the prosperity of nations worldwide.
Due to the financial, social, and psychological stress of COVID-19, and the reduction in supports attributed to physical distancing requirements, it is expected that anxiety, depression, and traumatic stress will increase dramatically as a function of COVID-19 (Cooke et al., 2020; Racine, Cooke, et al., 2020). A recent study by Wang et al. (2020) demonstrated the profound and immediate effects of COVID-19 in China, with 53.8% of the general population reporting moderate-to-severe levels of psychological impact due to the pandemic, 16.5% reporting moderate-to-extremely severe depressive symptoms, and 28.8% reporting moderate-to-extremely severe anxiety symptoms. Moreover, as physical distancing measures persist, and quarantine orders are (re)implemented, increased rates of mental illness are expected: Being quarantined is associated with a fourfold increased risk in stress-related symptoms (Sprang & Silman, 2013). It is also expected that COVID-19 will exacerbate symptom distress in individuals with preexisting mental health difficulties. In a sample of Canadian and American adults, Asmundson et al. (2020) demonstrated that the psychological burden of COVID-19 is higher in individuals with preexisting anxiety and mood-related disorders compared to those without mental illness. Without treatment, depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms can negatively impact daily functioning, quality of life, and mental health throughout the life span (e.g., Korczak & Goldstein, 2009; Scott et al., 2009; Van Ameringen, Mancini, & Farvolden, 2003; Whiteford et al., 2013). Preparation for an overburdened mental health care system due to mental illness that is precipitated, and exacerbated by COVID-19, is paramount.
COVID-19 has necessitated an immediate change to the acceptance and implementation of mental health care service delivery. This includes the implementation of telehealth services to respond to the influx of need for psychological services, while also responding to physical-distancing requirements imposed around the world. For the purpose of this commentary, we refer to telemental health as psychological service delivery via videoconferencing, telephone, or texting (Hilty et al., 2013; Jones et al., 2014; Siemer, Fogel, & Van Voorhees, 2011). Telemental health has also been expanded to include the assessment and diagnosis of mental illness (Hilty et al., 2013).
Research over the last decade has demonstrated that telemental health can be effectively delivered to individuals with a variety of psychiatric and somatic conditions, including anxiety, depression, and conduct disorders (Berryhill et al., 2019; Hailey, Roine, & Ohinmaa, 2008; Hilty et al., 2013; Siemer et al., 2011; Vigerland et al., 2016). Telemental health can be as effective in treating mental health difficulties when compared to in-person treatment (Gloff, LeNoue, Novins, & Myers, 2015). Telemental health may also be effective in reducing common barriers to accessing treatment, such as transportation to treatment sessions (Nelson, Cain, & Sharp, 2017), increasing access to evidence-based services in rural areas or in communities without specialized mental health services in Canada (Francisco & Archer, 2016; Gibson et al., 2011), and in low- and middle-income countries with low funding for in person services (Acharibasam & Wynn, 2018).
Importantly, although there are myriad benefits to telemental health, there are also notable limitations, and these should be weighed prior to the widespread adoption of telemental health practices with all clients during and beyond COVID-19. In this commentary, we summarise the potential benefits and challenges of implementing telehealth services during the COVID-19 pandemic. We also provide considerations from the client and provider perspectives, with special attention dedicated to child and adolescent clients. Finally, we highlight important considerations for research and policy.
Benefits of Telemental Health

There are several benefits of telemental health during COVID-19. First, physical distancing measures have been instituted across the world and may persist over the next year. Telemental health ensures the medical safety of clients and clinicians. Moreover, individuals with preexisting medical (e.g., cardiac disease, diabetes) and mental health comorbidities require strict adherence to physical-distancing precautions, as their health places them at greater risk of severe COVID-19 infection (Yang et al., 2020; Yao, Chen, & Xu, 2020). Second, a multitude of in-person psychological services (e.g., university/college clinics, schools, assessment centres) have been temporarily suspended due to the pandemic. Without alternatives or shifts in care delivery models, such as telemental health, many individuals would be left without access to needed treatment.
Third, many mental health programs have long waitlists, especially for individuals who are seeking treatment and unable to wait for the resolution of the pandemic to receive services. Fourth, telemental health offers wide availability of psychological services in both rural and urban settings. There are approximately 6.5 million Canadians living in rural settings (18.7% of population; Statistics Canada, 2017), and telemental health can reduce the barrier of accessibility to resources, thereby shrinking health inequalities that frequently exist for individuals in rural settings (Brearly et al., 2017; Hilty et al., 2013; Richardson, Christopher Frueh, Grubaugh, Egede, & Elhai, 2009). Fifth, as mentioned, those with anxiety symptoms, in particular, may experience heightened stress due to COVID-19 (Asmundson et al., 2020) and may therefore be more responsive to telemental health to gradually reintroduce anxiety-provoking situations (e.g., leaving the house, separating from caregiver). Finally, given the financial stress experienced by many individuals due to COVID-19, cost could be a significant barrier to seeking services. Preliminary evidence suggests potential cost-savings associated with telemental health, particularly with regard to reduced income loss due to travel and attendance at appointments (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Committee on Telepsychiatry, 2017). Taken together, the increased integration of telemental health presents opportunities for more equitable service delivery with a broader reach.
Considerations for All Clients

There are also several cautions and considerations that should be evaluated prior to universally pivoting to telemental health, as it may not be appropriate for all clients. First, there are telehealth challenges related to geographic rules regarding licensing and privacy regulations (Shachar, Engel, & Elwyn, 2020). In Canada, for example, the College of Alberta Psychologists dictates that registered psychologists within the province may only deliver services outside of Alberta if they are also registered with the local regulatory body of the client (College of Alberta Psychologists, 2018). Second, although telemental health can reduce some systemic barriers, it also has the potential to exacerbate others, particularly social inequalities. For example, despite increasing access to technology and Internet, 14% of Canadian adults do not have mobile devices and 20% do not have adequate Internet connections (Canadian Radio-TV and Telecommunications Commission of Canada, 2018). A digital divide in access exists among Canadians as well, in that access is less likely to be available in individuals or families with low income, low education level, or with immigration status (Haight, Quan-Haase, & Corbett, 2014). Indeed, it has been documented that individuals with lower income are less likely to have the necessary resources for connecting via telemental health (Ryan & Lewis, 2017). Moreover, for some individuals, the capability to navigate online resources will be extremely limited and may act as a deterrent for receiving psychological care. In the cases described above, empirically supported approaches that use telephone calls (e.g., McGrath et al., 2011; Mohr, Vella, Hart, Heckman, & Simon, 2008; Podina, Mogoase, David, Szentagotai, & Dobrean, 2016) may be a treatment option.
Third, individuals living in smaller dwellings, with immediate or extended family members and/or roommates, may not have a private location to engage in telemental health, and thus, there are threats to confidentiality which require serious consideration. When client confidentiality has the potential to be compromised, it is incumbent on the therapist to mitigate this risk by reviewing and repeatedly evaluating threats to confidentiality with the client. Fourth, there are potential limitations to telemental health in terms of providing psychological assessments over video-conferencing. In particular, many standardized assessment measures have not been validated for telehealth use in large, representative samples and it may be difficult to control for environmental factors that could impair performance on neurocognitive measures. Finally, it may be difficult to adequately monitor client presentations (e.g., facial affect, behavioural indicators of dissociation), especially in the absence of video-conferencing, if visual cues are less noticeable or absent. In sum, telemental health is not a panacea and requires careful consideration for appropriateness depending on client needs and standards for ensuring client confidentiality and security.
Considerations for Children and Youth

In an effort to curb the spread of COVID-19, significant changes to youth’s daily activities and operations have been imposed, including school closures, required social distancing from peers and other supports (e.g., teachers), loss of athletics and other organized activities that are frequently sources of strength and support, loss of resources, home confinement, and potential increased family stress (e.g., lost family income; increased violence in the home). The capacity of youth to cope with these circumstances may be limited.
Prior to COVID-19, nearly one in five children had a mental health disorder, and in Canada, only a third of those children received services to meet their mental health needs (Waddell, Shepherd, Schwartz, & Barican, 2014). Initial estimates from other countries initially affected by COVID-19 suggest elevated mental health concerns in children and youth related to COVID-19 (see review by Racine, Cooke, et al., 2020). Importantly, for vulnerable youth, such as those with preexisting mental health difficulties, 83% reported worsened mental health symptoms and 26% reported being unable to access any mental health support since the onset of COVID-19 (Lee, 2020). Arguably, the Canadian context may differ from other countries, but to our knowledge, no studies estimating mental illness in children and youth due to COVID-19 are currently available. Nonetheless, since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, distress and support line calls and texts to Kids Help Phone in Canada have increased by 70% and 51%, respectively (Watson, 2020). Thus, there is likely to be an influx of need for mental health services in children and youth.
As noted above, telemental health has several benefits, including increased reach and accessibility for children living in rural areas, reduced treatment attrition, and cost savings for parents due to reduced travel cost and time off work (Nelson et al., 2017). Some children and youth may also experience greater comfort with telemental versus in-person approaches. Parents and youth endorse equal satisfaction with telemental and in-person care (Mayworm et al., 2020), and satisfaction tends to increase upon return appointments as the patient and family becomes more acquainted with the treatment approach (Myers, Valentine, & Melzer, 2008). Moreover, in addition to servicing children and youth, many clinicians and children’s mental health centres provide instrumental support to caregivers and families (i.e., childcare, respite care, meals; Hoagwood et al., 2010). The adoption of telemental services ensures that caregivers and families continue to receive essential support, guidance, and coping strategies for managing child and youth emotional and behaviour difficulties (Racine, Birken, & Madigan, 2020).
However, there are several telemental health considerations specific to children and youth. First, threats to confidentiality require special consideration for youth. This is of particular relevance for youth struggling with highly sensitive issues such as disclosures of gender identity or sexual orientation concerns, substance use disorders, and/or for those where the home environment is unsafe (e.g., abuse, witnessing domestic violence, see Racine, Hartwick, Collin-Vézina, & Madigan, 2020). The possibility for a parent or family member to overhear a therapy session is increased and largely out of the control of the therapist. Second, youth who struggle with emotional and self-regulatory abilities may experience considerable difficulty sitting in front of a computer for a full therapy session and may leave the room abruptly if feeling overwhelmed. Youth with attentional difficulties, severe mental illness (e.g., suicidality) and/or high levels of emotion dysregulation or family conflict may struggle to engage over telemental health platforms, and, if possible, in-person support may need to be prioritized for these clients during COVID-19. Third, approximately 70–80% of youth interventions are provided in schools (Bernstein, Layne, Egan, & Tennison, 2005; DuPaul & Eckert, 1997; Rones & Hoagwood, 2000; Wilson & Lipsey, 2007) and this option may become unavailable to youth given that many schools districts are expected to be closed or limited in physical space for additional requests such as therapy, while navigating COVID-19 restrictions. Thus, telemental health could provide access to psychological services for the students without the option to receive this service in schools. Finally, although telemental health has the benefit of providing the therapist with a window into the child’s home environment that would not be available with in-person care, the narrow “lens” of the telemental health camera may limit assessment of interpersonal interactions, family dynamics, and precludes detection of softly spoken but potentially clinically important parallel conversations.
Considerations for Clinicians

Prior to COVID-19, the implementation and uptake of telemental health services within the public and private sector was slow. Despite clinicians’ positive attitudes toward telemental health (Simms, Gibson, & O’Donnell, 2011), several barriers were identified that reduced clinician enthusiasm for telemental health, including perceived challenges in establishing client rapport and therapeutic alliance (Berger, 2017; Goldstein & Glueck, 2016), threats to confidentiality and privacy, and concerns related to payments for services (Shachar et al., 2020). With the rapid adoption of telemental health in the face of COVID-19, many practitioners and community- and hospital-based mental health systems have been able to address or overcome these barriers to provide services to clients. For example, clinicians are using strategies to engage clients online (e.g., shortened appointments, session breaks, and interactive online activities) and many are using software platforms that meet regional requirements for privacy and confidentiality.
Nevertheless, clinicians may still face unique challenges in the delivery of telemental health services during the COVID-19 pandemic. The anticipated rise in the onset and exacerbation of mental illness due to COVID-19 may leave agencies with high referral rates and long wait lists. Consistent with Principle II: Responsible Caring from the Canadian Code of Ethics (Canadian Psychological Association, 2015), clinicians and their agencies will have to determine how to provide high-quality services for a large body of Canadians in need, while ensuring caseloads remain manageable for clinicians.
Concerns in regard to the ethical delivery of telemental health have been a particular focus for clinicians during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, established practice guidelines are available from multiple governing bodies (e.g., American Psychological Association, 2013; Canadian Psychological Association, 2020) to ensure there is guidance for clinicians on telehealth-specific ethical challenges. These guidelines document the importance of providing informed consent that dictates the associated risks of telehealth services, such as limitations to confidentiality (e.g., via Internet hacking, public discovery), potential communication difficulties (e.g., missed visual cues), and limitations of technology (e.g., time delays, poor Internet connection). Emphasis is also placed on ensuring clinicians maintain boundaries of competency (e.g., remaining up-to-date on the efficacy of telehealth services, demonstrating clinical competence in person prior to utilizing telehealth) and preparing for potential crises (e.g., suicide risk) during telemental health sessions. Relatedly, some authors have determined that although COVID-19 poses distinct challenges to psychology doctoral trainees, the pandemic also serves as a rare training opportunity to build additional ethical and clinical competencies (Desai, Lankford, & Schwartz, 2020).
Considerations for Systems

On May 3, 2020, the federal government committed to invest $240M in telehealth services to respond to the influx of Canadians in need of virtual medical care due to COVID-19. However, to prepare for the potential inundation of individuals in need of brief or sustained psychological intervention due to COVID-19, it is imperative for governmental officials and policymakers to allocate resources for telemental health (and/or telemental health research) as well. Given the economic impact and job losses associated with COVID-19, it may become difficult for individuals to pay for psychological services. It is essential to ensure that vulnerable and minority groups can gain access to mental health care (Gruber et al., 2020). Moreover, given that one of the central barriers to practitioners using telemental health is technology-specific (i.e., computer literacy; Scott Kruse et al., 2018), policy resources could be allocated to online training modules to increase practitioners’ computer literacy for telemental health platforms, so that access to care could be expanded.
As we are on the precipice of a wave of increased and likely sustained mental health needs due to COVID-19, clinicians and organizations that provide mental health care need to prepare to meet the incoming demand, while also balancing physical distancing rules, client and clinician safety, and confidentiality. At a systems level, needs assessments are required to determine for whom, and under what circumstances, in-person support should be prioritized (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Committee on Telepsychiatry, 2017; Kaufman, Petkova, Bhui, & Schulze, 2020). For example, emergency and intensive psychological and psychiatry services should remain open, and cases can be triaged to determine if in-person services are needed to ensure client safety. This includes consideration of vulnerable populations and alternative resources for those without accessibility to the Internet.
Considerations for Research

Despite several challenges to telehealth have been noted in this commentary (e.g., lack of a private location, lack of standardized measures, problems reading visual cues), to our knowledge, there is no literature documenting the actual frequency that clinicians encounter these challenges. It has been shown, however, that one predictor of telemental health use is the perception of ease of use (Simms et al., 2011). Thus, future research that documents the frequency of encountering telemental health barriers is warranted. If it is found that encountered barriers are infrequent, it may serve to assuage clinicians who are hesitant to use telemental health services.
Although telehealth interventions have shown some positive treatment effects (Hailey et al., 2008; Pennant et al., 2015), it is essential to determine which characteristics of existing telehealth interventions can be further scaled, without losing treatment efficacy (or causing harm), to reach the expected number of individuals needing services. For example, can telehealth interventions for mental illness be effectively delivered by paraprofessionals (e.g., nurses or coaches) versus professionals (e.g., psychologists, psychiatrists), and in group-based versus individual telehealth to reach larger groups and further broaden the reach to meet the expected influx of mental health needs and resources due to COVID-19? Research evidence supports that varied approaches to telemental health in adult populations (i.e., group-based telehealth; delivery by a paraprofessional; online modules to waitlisted groups) can be adopted and treatment effectiveness can be maintained. However, the literature on whether these varied approaches are effective for child and youth populations is limited, highlighting an important gap in the literature (Jones et al., 2014; Vigerland et al., 2016). Thus, the rapid move to telemental health due to COVID-19 presents research opportunities, especially for understudied child and youth populations, to garner knowledge on which clients are most likely to benefit and/or experience adverse effects from telemental health service delivery.
Innovative processes and techniques that increase the scalability of mental health services will be critical. For example, the development of online psychoeducation modules that can be provided to individuals or families on waitlists, and evidence-based self-guided programs delivered online, are particularly welcome (Vigerland et al., 2016). Brief and low-intensity telemental health interventions (e.g., single- or one-session interventions; Davis, Ollendick, & Öst, 2019; Schleider & Weisz, 2017) that demonstrate treatment efficacy should also be a priority for individuals who meet the criteria. Another possibility is to move to group versus individual-based telemental health treatments when appropriate to increase the reach of mental health resources to individuals in distress. When feasible, hybrid models could be explored, wherein in-person care is utilized for building rapport, establishing therapeutic alliance, ensuring confidence in diagnostic formulation, and treatment planning, followed by telemental health sessions for ongoing monitoring and treatment.
Although many of these treatment configurations are being implemented to meet the rapidly evolving mental health needs of Canadians due to COVID-19, research evaluations of these modalities and therapeutic formations are needed. Indeed, all of the approaches above, and their adaptations due to COVID-19, will require thorough empirical examination. These approaches could then inform the development of empirically driven telehealth practice guidelines or expert consensus statements, in a post pandemic future.
Conclusions

In the modern technology era, it is surprising that the uptake of telemental health services has remained relatively slow. COVID-19 has served as a catalyst for the acceptance and implementation of these services and this newfound positive regard for telemental health services by professionals and clients alike, may be maintained long after COVID-19 (Wind, Rijkeboer, Andersson, & Riper, 2020). For the general population, telemental health provides an innovative way of delivering much-needed services to a large number of people in a safe manner. However, clinicians should keep in mind that telehealth services are not a catch-all solution to the suspected mental health wave of the pandemic. Although telemental health may be appropriate for some clients, others will continue to require more intensive in-person care. For individuals with severe mental illness (e.g., active psychosis, suicidality), complex family dynamics, and in situations in which confidentiality concerns are paramount (e.g., maltreatment), in-person care should remain available. Moreover, despite the exponential trends in media use, telehealth services are not accessible for all clients. Vulnerable groups (e.g., low socioeconomic status, homeless, rural communities) have historically struggled to receive adequate health care services and will continue to struggle without alternative means of delivery for psychological services. Government officials, policymakers, researchers, and clinicians must come together to ensure high-quality mental health services are available to all Canadian citizens during this global crisis.",
"9": "There is a worldwide gap between the mental health needs of children and adolescents and them receiving treatment (Kieling, Baker-Henningham, Belfer, et al., 2011; Patel, Kieling, Maulik, & Divan, 2013), one that has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 crisis (Duan & Zhu, 2020; Lee, 2020). Under normal circumstances, fewer than a quarter of children with mental health disorders are appropriately identified as needing services (Jensen, Goldman, Offord, et al., 2011). This includes at least 15% of U.S. students struggling with learning and attention problems and needs that go unidentified, unaddressed, and unmet (Cortiella & Horowitz, 2014). The COVID-19 crisis has largely curtailed the evaluation of mental health and educational needs (Pfefferbaum & North, 2020), meaning even more learning difficulties will go unidentified.
There are many barriers to children receiving assessment and treatment for mental health and learning needs, one of which relates to limited access to appropriate services. Access to services is also rife with structural inequities (Kastrup, 2019; Saxena, Thornicroft, Knapp, & Whiteford, 2007), and disasters tend to both highlight and exacerbate such inequities (Yun, Lurie, & Hyde, 2010). School psychologists are generally less available in rural areas, as well as overwhelmed in suburban and urban areas (Clopton & Knesting, 2006; Myers et al., 2010). Especially vulnerable to not receiving adequate psychoeducational services are children of color (Morgan, Farkas, Hillemeier, & Maczuga, 2012; Morgan et al., 2015), in part because of less general access (Flores, 2010; Inkelas, Raghavan, Larson, Kuo, & Ortega, 2007). Not just limited to academic and mental health evaluations, during the COVID-19 crisis, those from the most vulnerable populations have the least access to services they need (van Dorn, Cooney, & Sabin, 2020).
Between an identified shortage of school psychologists in rural areas (Castillo, Curtis, & Tan, 2014; Fagan, 2004; Gadke, Valley-Gray, & Rossen, 2016) and many school psychologists, who spend the overwhelming majority of their time doing psychoeducational testing and related services (Curtis, Chesno-Grier, Abshier, Sutton, & Hunley, 2002; Reschly, 2000) working at over twice the capacity recommended by the National Association of School Psychologists (2010), a redistribution of resources is necessary. Prior to COVID-19, there was a call for assessment services provided in schools to be comprehensive, widely available, and even more utilized, despite the challenges of access (Cummings et al., 2004). In the era of COVID-19, there has been a specific call for students with learning challenges and other disabilities not go unevaluated and thus unsupported, despite even greater structural challenges (Wright, 2020).
While not without challenges and necessary adaptations (Alami, Gagnon, & Fortin, 2019), telehealth has the potential to significantly redistribute (especially geographically, but also socioeconomically) mental health and psychological testing resources (Grady, 2012). Online mental health services, and specifically Internet-based testing, have been championed because of the potential for improved access by overcoming many practical constraints (Barak, 1999; Berends et al., 2004; Young, 2005). Internet-based and videoconferencing assessment services have been used globally with children and youth (Boydell et al., 2014; Lingely-Pottie & McGrath, 2006; Reed, McLaughlin, & Milholland, 2000), largely to fill in gaps in access in areas with greater demand than local service providers are able to meet (Boydell et al., 2014; Cruz, Krupinski, Lopez, & Weinstein, 2005; Elford et al., 2000; Myers, Valentine, & Melzer, 2007, 2008; Pesämaa et al., 2004, 2007). However, a disproportionate burden has been placed on performance-based cognitive (and other) assessment, especially during this COVID-19 crisis moment, when providers are being forced to adapt much more rapidly than research agendas will allow. Cognitive and other performance-based measures are harder to adapt to a remote, online format than, for example, counseling services, and with student need continuing without pause, there is no time to wait for robust bodies of research to renorm tests in this new format.
Remote, online administration of cognitive measures has the potential to increase access to these services by redistributing the workforce. During the COVID-19 crisis, in many places in the United States, it will be the only option, if services are to continue. Even though some general guidance has been provided for how to adapt tests generally to a remote, online format (Wright, Mihura, Pade, & McCord, 2020) during the COVID-19 crisis, this is not a replacement for systematic research on the equivalence of testing in this format to a traditional, in-person administration.
Given the range of psychological processes engaged during the course of a typical cognitive (intelligence) evaluation (Kovacs & Conway, 2019), altering the format of administration could in theory alter the tasks, and thus the emerging data, significantly. Some of these alterations and their likely effects are more obvious, such as stimuli being shown in different formats (on an upright screen, as opposed to a flat stimulus book or tablet). Some may be more subtle, though, such as a change in the interpersonal interaction between examiner and student in this format, interaction with a proctor on the student’s side, or potentially students being able to see themselves in the telehealth platform. Each of these has the potential to affect students’ performance on tasks. However, efforts need to be made to try to approximate standardized, in-person administration as closely as possible. Adaptations can include some modifications to administration prompts, where and how stimulus materials are presented on the screen, and how to coach and use a proctor at specific moments in administration. To evaluate the effectiveness of these alterations, they should be consistent and standardized, just as examiners are taught to adhere to standardized administration procedures in traditional testing.
Two issues become especially salient in the delivery of remote, online performance-based assessments. First, it becomes much more difficult to maintain test security and integrity, mandated in the psychology ethics code (American Psychological Association, 2017). While psychologists never have full control over test security, it is important that they take reasonable steps to protect it (Wright et al., 2020), including explicitly telling clients and proctors that screen recording and screenshots are not allowed. Having a proctor present (as was the case in the present study) significantly reduces the ability for clients to compromise the security and integrity of tests.
Second, the requirement for clients to have reliable, high-speed Internet access and appropriate technology can amplify structural inequities in our society (Wright et al., 2020), with the most vulnerable and high-need populations having the least access to assessment (and other) services (Yun et al., 2010; van Dorn et al., 2020). Although it may be beyond assessment psychologists to solve these larger societal inequities themselves, having the option to conduct even remote, online assessments in a neutral, equipped place, such as a school (again, as was the case in the present study), can mitigate the barriers that vulnerable populations may face in accessing tele-assessment services.
The Wechsler Intelligence Scales for Children, in their continually updated forms (currently the fifth edition; WISC-V; Wechsler, 2014a), are internationally the most widely used test with children and adolescents (Oakland, Douglas, & Kane, 2016). It often serves as the basis for learning disability evaluations (Oakland et al., 2016), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder evaluations (Moura, Costa, & Simões, 2019), and other issues, such as intellectual developmental disorder, giftedness, and autism spectrum disorder (Miller et al., 2019). It already has a history of some adaptation for new technology, as it was adapted and tested for equivalency using the Q-Interactive system, utilizing iPads to display administration information and record forms for the examiner and stimulus materials and response forms for students (Daniel, Wahlstrom, & Zhang, 2014). Adapting the WISC-V for use in a remote, online administration environment has the potential for increasing access to this widely used test in significant ways, especially during the COVID-19 crisis.
Present Study

The present study aimed to evaluate the equivalence of two administration procedures of the WISC-V: the traditional, standardized, in-person administration and remote, digital, online administration (entirely remote, using a telehealth platform). The equivalence of data captured by remote, online administration and traditional, in-person administration was evaluated. The goal was to evaluate both index and subtest standard scores, to determine if there was a significant impact of the method of administration, to determine if the current normative and psychometric information from the traditional, in-person test development could be applied to the remote, online format. It must be noted that this study evaluated a very specific set of protocols for delivering remote, online administration of the WISC-V. The generalizability of any findings should be limited to trained test administrators who follow the specific protocol examined, as closely as possible, including specific digital platform requirements, examiner training, and use of an informed in-person proctor.
Method

Equivalence Study Design
For the present study, a case control match design was utilized, in which examinees took the WISC-V in only one format (traditional, in-person or remote, online). While a matched design required a larger sample, it avoided testing effects of test-retest or alternate forms designs. That is, when an examinee answers either the same type of problem or the exact problem more than once, learning may have occurred (of the problem-solving strategy or the content) that can alter the performance the second time. The case control match design created two groups that were matched on specific variables/characteristics (in this case age and gender), each group receiving only one format of test administration, as would be the case in clinical practice. Therefore, two groups roughly equal in number, matched on age and gender, were created, with examinees randomly assigned to one of the two groups. The Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition (KBIT-2) was also administered in the same administration format (traditional, standardized, in-person) to all participants to be able to pair participants on IQ to better ensure equivalent groups.
Participants
The sample consisted of 256 children, ages 6 to 16, who were recruited by between December 2019 and April 2020 in varied regions across the country (12% from the Midwest, 18% from the Northeast, 40% from the South, 15% from the Southeast, and 15% from the West). Participants were recruited from schools with demographic characteristics similar to a general school population and were not specifically screened for any specific disorders (intellectual, learning, or otherwise), to maintain generalizability to the general population. However, there were no participants with specific hearing, vision, or physical impairments in the present study. Case control matching (on age and gender) was used for the study. Participants were randomly assigned to either remote, online administration or traditional, in-person administration of the WISC-V, with roughly equal numbers in each cell by age and gender (see Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of the Sample
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
It should be noted that because of the COVID-19 crisis, data collection was stopped before the full intended sample could be evaluated; as such, the cells were not entirely equal in the case control matched design.
Table 1 reports demographic characteristics of the sample. The subgroups taking the WISC-V with standard or remote administration were very similar. Overall, there was roughly equal representation of males and females, across administration formats.
Measures
Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition (KBIT-2)
The KBIT-2 (Kaufman, 2004) is a brief, individually administered broad intelligence measure consisting of three subtests. Two subtests, Verbal Knowledge and Riddles, compose a Verbal scale, and one subtest, Matrices, composes a Nonverbal scale. Together, the three subtests contribute to a general IQ composite score. The test and its scales have exhibited good internal consistency and appear to measure what they purport to measure (Bain & Jaspers, 2010), with particular strength of the IQ composite.
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, Fifth Edition (WISC-V)
The WISC-V (Wechsler, 2014a) is an individually administered, multisubtest, performance-based intellectual ability test for children aged 6–16. The widely used measure produces an overall full-scale IQ, as well as multiple index scores for component domains of intellectual functioning. The test has exhibited strong reliability of its scores and validity of its score interpretations in its traditional, standardized format (Dombrowski, Canivez, & Watkins, 2018; Na & Burns, 2016; Wechsler, 2014b), especially noted for its strong validity evidence base as a measure of general intelligence.
Procedure
All procedures of the present study were approved by PresenceLearning’s research review committee, which oversees human protections and research ethics. Examiners were school and clinical psychologists qualified and experienced in administering the WISC-V and KBIT-2, as well as the use of the telehealth platform that was specifically configured for the administration of psychological tests. As each participant was scheduled for testing, they were randomly assigned to either the traditional, in-person or the remote, online administration format, with the requirement that the cases within each Age × Gender “cell” would be divided generally equally between the formats.
For the present study, all stimulus materials for the WISC-V were provided by Pearson in PDF format for the ability to present it via screen presentation (they have made these materials temporarily available more widely during the COVID-19 crisis via qglobal.pearsonclinical.com). Therefore, no physical stimulus book was needed for the remote, online administration procedure, nor was a document camera to project stimulus materials from physical stimulus books from the examiner’s side to the examinee. Examinees needed to have at least a 13-in. monitor to maintain size commensurate with the printed stimulus books, and this was verified ahead of time.
Each examinee first took the KBIT-2. Every examinee was administered the KBIT-2 in the same format: traditional, paper-and-pencil format. Then each examinee took the complete WISC-V, in standard test sequence, in the assigned format (remote, online or traditional, in-person). For the purposes of this study, remote, online administration was simulated, using different rooms within the same setting (most often two different rooms within the participant’s home, the examiner’s home, or in a school office setting). The same examiner administered the WISC-V as had administered the KBIT-2, with a 15-min break between them (regardless of format), to standardize fatigue effects across the two groups. Typically, both the examiner and participant were connected to the same Internet connection, which may have reduced some potential technological hitches that can arise from unreliable Internet connectivity on either or both ends of the tele-assessment dyad.
Examiners’ scoring decisions were used in the present analysis for any test that required immediate scoring (to determine reaching basals and ceilings/discontinues, for example), to determine whether examiners’ decisions were affected by format. That is, any test that needed immediate scoring utilized immediate scoring, and each was checked afterward for accuracy by a member of the research team, to determine if the administration format affected how accurate these scoring decisions were. All subtests that did not require immediate scoring were scored after the fact by the research team, and all raw scores were entered into the WISC-V online scoring program via Q-Global, regardless of administration format, in the same manner. Data were reviewed for quality by examining any potential outliers and data entry mistakes (e.g., scores that fell outside of the possible range), and entry errors were corrected.
Proctors (in-person assistants used in the remote, online administration procedure) were recruited from different sources. Of note, they were not psychological professionals and at no time performed any task that required prior training or a clinical background. They did no demonstration of any items or any other actual assessment function. The proctors received a <10-min preparatory lesson about what to expect and how and how not to interact with the examinee and examiner and received a written guide about how to facilitate the setting up of the cameras on the examinee’s side. Specifically, the proctors were used to verify that the video and sound were working properly on the participants’ end of the assessment before the evaluation started, handing the participants physical items (like blocks and response booklets) for younger participants, and providing overall safety supervision (having an adult in the room in case of an emergency). Specifically for block design, for younger examinees, the proctor picked up and dropped the blocks between items; older examinees were instructed to do so, and in both cases the examiner prompted if and when the scrambled blocks needed to be adjusted. When the proctor was not completing one of these tasks at the direction of the examiner, they were asked to sit in the back of the room, out of the examinee’s line of vision, and within eyesight of the examiner on the videoconferencing platform, so that the examiner could verify that the proctor was not interacting at all with the examinee or administration of the test.
Data Analysis Plan
Group equivalence was first explored by comparing the KBIT-2 index and IQ composite scores (all of which were collected by traditional administration of the KBIT-2) of the two different groups (online vs. traditional administration of the WISC-V groups), using both significance tests (p values of t tests) and Cohen’s d. The standards of p ≥ .05 and d < 0.2 (in accordance with the recommendation of Cohen, 1988) were used as the standard for equivalence of the independent groups. Cohen’s d is calculated as the difference between mean scores on the two different administration formats, divided by the pooled standard deviation of scores.
Then, participants were paired on the KBIT-2 IQ composite, to create more specific paired comparisons by IQ level. The whole sample (N = 273) was sorted and matched on the KBIT-2 IQ composite. Of the entire sample, 85 in-person/online pairs (N = 170; 62.3% of the sample) were able to be matched exactly on the IQ composite. Another 20 pairs (N = 40; 14.7% of the sample) were able to be matched within an IQ composite score difference of 1. For each of these pairs, they were counterbalanced with another pair, such that one had an IQ composite difference of 1 with online administration higher, and one had an IQ composite difference of 1 with in-person administration higher. Another 20 pairs (N = 40; 14.7% of the sample) were matched the same way, but with an IQ composite difference greater than 1, but still counterbalanced by administration method. Another three pairs (N = 6; 2.2% of the sample) were identified and matched to ensure that IQ composite scores at the extremes were included, and these three pairs were counterbalanced together (such that one pair had a difference of 24, with online administration being higher, and the other two pairs had differences of 9 and 15, with in-person administration being higher). Seventeen cases (6.2% of the sample), primarily from the average IQ range, were left unmatched in the final sample and were excluded from analyses (see Table 1 in the online supplemental materials for information on excluded cases). This process resulted in a final analysis sample of 128 pairs (N = 256).
To evaluate equivalence in the current study, a two-one-sided-tests (TOST) procedure was employed (Lakens, 2017; Richter & Richter, 2002; Schuirmann, 1987; Seaman & Serlin, 1998). The TOST is a stringent analysis (more so than a t test or using the minimally detectable difference) that uses a confidence interval (CI) within a predefined bound, called the smallest effect size of interest (SESOI), to determine that two conditions’ measured differences are statistically negligible, and thus the conditions are equivalent. The TOST procedure uses a 90% CI to test for equivalence at the p = .05 level. While some have advocated that the SESOI for health and psychosocial factors should equal 0.5 SD (Norman, Sloan, & Wyrwich, 2003), the present study utilized a more stringent metric, opting for 0.3 SD, widely used to represent a low effect size. This stricter SESOI is a far narrower difference than the precision of the scores themselves, based on standard error of measurement (see Wechsler, 2014b, p. 61). As such, for index scores (M = 100, SD = 15), the 90% CI (Richter & Richter, 2002) of the paired difference between traditional, in-person administration and remote, online administration must fall between a lower bound of −4.5 and an upper bound of 4.5 (90% CI [–4.5, 4.5]) to be considered equivalent (at an alpha of .05). For scaled scores (M = 10, SD = 3), the paired-difference CI must fall between a lower bound of −0.9 and an upper bound of 0.9 (90% CI [–0.9, 0.9]) to be considered equivalent.
Results

Randomization Check
Given the case control matching by age and gender for the two groups, with random assignment, there would be no expectation of large or systematic differences between the groups. To confirm this, the KBIT-2 scores (given in identical administration formats) were analyzed for independent group differences (before pairing participants). As seen in Table 2,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Significance and Effect Size for the Difference of Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition Scores for the Remote, Online Administration Group and the Traditional, In-Person Administration Group
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
there were no statistically significant differences on the KBIT-2 full IQ composite, as well as on either the verbal or nonverbal indices, and the Cohen’s d effect sizes for each of these was far below the threshold of low effect (see Table 3).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics for the Kaufman Brief Intelligence Test, Second Edition (KBIT-2) and Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, Fifth Edition (WISC-V) Index and Subtest Scores by Administration Format
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
As such, the two groups (traditional, in-person administration of the WISC-V and remote, online administration) can be considered generally equivalent, based on the scores that emerged on the KBIT-2 from each.
WISC-V Equivalence
Table 3 reports the means and standard deviations of the WISC-V index and subtest scores (as well as the KBIT-2) for each format and for the sample as a whole. Table 4
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Confidence Intervals (CIs, 90%) for Difference Scores for Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, Fifth Edition Indices and Subtests Between the Remote, Online Administration Group and the Traditional, In-Person Administration Group
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
shows for the WISC-V the CIs for the difference between administration formats. All of the indices’ CIs fall within the threshold for equivalence (−4.5, 4.5), demonstrating no significant effects of the difference in administration on scores. The difference score CIs for all subtest scores except one also fall within the threshold for equivalence (–.9, .9), again demonstrating no significant method effects. The exception is Letter–Number Sequencing, which revealed significantly higher scores for those who were administered the WISC-V in the traditional, in-person format, as compared to their remote, online counterparts.
Tables 5
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 5. Intercorrelations of Core Subtest and Index Sores for the Traditional, In-Person Administration Group
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
and 6
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 6. Intercorrelations of Core Subtest and Index Sores for the Remote, Online Administration Group
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
present the intercorrelations between subtests and index scores on both the KBIT-2 (index scores only) and the WISC-V, separated by administration type. Similar patterns of intercorrelation emerge for the traditional, in-person group and the remote, online group. First, there are low to moderate correlations among all the subtests and indices, expected as all tasks measure at least to some degree a general intelligence factor (g). The subtest components that comprise the indices generally correlated as expected, more strongly with each other than with other subtests and indices. For example, for both administration groups, the Coding and Symbol Search subtests correlate moderately with each other, with the Processing Speed Index (which is expected, as they are included heavily in the calculation of it), and the Full-Scale IQ, with very low correlations with any other subtest or index. The similar intercorrelations suggest that the test data maintained their general factor structure in the remote, online administration procedure, when compared to traditional, in-person administration.
To evaluate the statistical significance of any differences in correlations between the two administration procedures of the WISC-V, a modified asymptotic approach to calculating CIs for the difference between the nonoverlapping, dependent correlation coefficients was employed (Zou, 2007). Each WISC-V correlation was examined for significant difference between mode, and several correlations emerged as significantly different. However, these significant differences were generally either at the between-subtest level or the subtest-nonrelated-index level (see Table 2 in the online supplemental materials, presented with Fisher-z-transformed correlation coefficients). None of the correlations at the index and full-scale IQ level emerged with significant differences between administration methods. As such, the structure of the measure is generally equivalent between the two administration methods.
Discussion

The present study aimed to evaluate the equivalence of an online, remote administration procedure to traditional, in-person administration of the WISC-V. There were no exhibited method effects for the different modes of administration in this nonclinical sample on any index score or the full-scale IQ. Additionally, most subtests administered saw no significant difference by administration method, with the exception of Letter–Number Sequencing. This subtest is a supplemental subtest and does not contribute to the overall full-scale IQ or any index score. The results from this particular subtest, though, should be interpreted with caution. Specifically, results may represent a slight underestimate of scores that would be obtained from traditional, in-person administration of the test.
No mediating mechanisms for potential differences were examined in the present study. As such, there is no way to know why scores differed on this subtest, despite the stimulus materials being among the more similar between methods (Letter–Number Sequencing uses only auditory stimuli). Many subtests with more obvious alteration in stimulus materials, such as Matrix Reasoning or Visual Puzzles (with the stimulus pictures digitized into the screen in front of them and situated in a different orientation than either the traditional administration or the Q-Interactive administration, both which present the stimuli lying flat on the desk in front of the student), were not affected by administration procedure. Further research is needed to determine the underlying mechanisms for these differences.
While more data should be collected to compare the two administration methods, especially with specific clinical populations, the present study suggests that the scores elicited by the two different administration methods are mostly equivalent and interchangeable, and as such all the WISC-V normative and psychometric (reliability, validity, utility) research can be applied confidently to the new online, remote administration of the test.
Limitations
The present study has several significant limitations. The most important limitation is the generalizability of the sample. Specifically, the present study utilized a general school sample, rather than a sample from a specific clinical population, so generalizability is limited. Different clinical samples, however, may have specific interaction effects with the digital platform for the online, remote administration, which should be considered when interpreting scores in clinical populations. Similarly, the present study did not collect an abundance of demographic data, including racial and ethnic background, and the overwhelming majority of participants had parents with at least some college experience. It is not necessarily a nationally representative sample, though care was taken to recruit from different geographical regions.
Further, the present study does not comment on the equivalence of all online, remote administrations of cognitive tests with their traditional, in-person analog. That is, the exhibited equivalence of this specific procedure for this specific test (the WISC-V) does not imply equivalence for another procedure used with the WISC-V, nor does it imply equivalence of online, remote administration of other tests. The online, remote administration of the WISC-V in the present study adhered to very specific, rigorous protocols (with regard to digital specifications, specific training for examiners and coaching of proctors, and standardized administration modifications). The equivalence of remote, online administration that does not adhere to these protocols has not been determined. However, especially when constraints are present, the results of remote, online administration of the WISC-V, even slightly outside of the administration procedures used in the present study, are likely to be useful and usable. Ethical interpretation of scores that emerge from even slight alterations in this standardized protocol require careful consideration (Wright et al., 2020).
Conclusion
Online, remote administration of cognitive and intellectual tests like the WISC-V has the potential to significantly increase access to important evaluations. This is true during this COVID-19 crisis, during which a great deal of assessment has halted entirely, as well as during more “normal” times, when there are shortages and inequities of access to evaluation. Being able to test students online allows for a redistribution of resources within states, allowing for access in remote areas (without hours of travel time) and lightening of caseloads in more densely populated environments. Students who need psychoeducational evaluations should have them, even during a pandemic, and they should have them in a timely fashion. The remote, online use of the WISC-V can help achieve that goal.",
"10": "At the time of writing this introduction, COVID-19 has infected millions and killed hundreds of thousands in what is expected to be the first of multiple waves of disease outbreaks (World Health Organization, 2020b). Most forecasts do not anticipate highly effective treatment(s) or vaccine(s) in many countries until at least 2021, and eradication anytime soon seems unlikely. COVID-19 is highly contagious even before symptoms emerge, and efforts to mitigate exposure risk and contain outbreaks largely center on individuals physically distancing themselves from one another (World Health Organization, 2020a). Already, health disparities related to risk of exposure, mortality, and/or access to testing and care are becoming evident (van Dorn, Cooney, & Sabin, 2020). As such, we can reasonably expect a long-term transformation in the field of psychotherapy to intermittently accommodate periods or regions of sustained physical distancing requirements.
As a result of the first pandemic wave, psychotherapy services have been rapidly transformed worldwide to accommodate the need for prolonged physical distancing. The clinic I work with, as just one example, migrated more than 80 clinicians and supervisors from 100% in-person services to 100% remote work in less than 3 weeks. There was great camaraderie in that work as psychotherapists around the globe faced similar challenges and many of us collaborated to meet the challenges of this uninvited transformation. Telepsychotherapy, which was previously used by only a minority of psychotherapists (Glueckauf et al., 2018), has quickly become a typical mechanism for service delivery. With practice-management issues largely resolved, our collective attention has shifted to combing the extant literature for high-quality articles to inform how our newly launched telepsychotherapy services can follow empirically grounded and ethical practices. The need for high-quality information to ensure that telepsychotherapy services are of the highest caliber is global, yet there are disparities in who has access to that critical information.
The Journal of Psychotherapy Integration (JPI) is uniquely positioned to continue the spirit of camaraderie and help address unmet needs for access to evidence-based resources in telepsychotherapy for at least two reasons. First, by necessity, nearly every psychotherapist in the world has now adopted an integrative approach to psychotherapy, even if they do not yet realize it. Second, JPI is a truly international journal with extensive reach across every region impacted by the pandemic, including those locations where psychotherapists are faced with limited access to evidence-based resources. I will briefly elaborate on each of those points because they frame the significant impact of the articles appearing in this special issue on telepsychotherapy.
Widespread Adoption of an Integrative Approach

Several pathways may define an integrative psychotherapy approach, but integration is almost inherent to delivering competent telepsychotherapy. Among other things, competent telepsychotherapists elevate their attention to approximating the experience of eye contact, adjusting sound settings that impact verbal prosody, providing overt instruction regarding patient webcam placement so that a more complete range of nonverbal behaviors is visible to the clinician, and evaluating how clinician expertise, trustworthiness, and professionalism appear when on display to their patients. All of those reflect elevation of common factor considerations (Rosenthal & Frank, 1956) that transcend any specific treatment that may be delivered as telepsychotherapy. At the same time, we know remarkably little about how telepsychotherapy may impact treatment credibility or expectancies.
Beyond renewed attention to the role of common factors in quality treatment, this period of transformation is an opportunity for psychotherapists to break from old molds we learned in graduate school and embrace newer ones that remain evidence based. Let me just cite one example from nosology. For years, many of us have recognized and learned to live with some of the flaws in diagnoses outlined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (fifth edition) of the American Psychiatric Association (2013). Yet more parsimonious, transdiagnostic treatments (e.g., Barlow et al., 2017) and even nosologies have become available that may better fit with an integrative approach to psychotherapy. For example, the hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP) provides a more parsimonious and data-driven alternative to traditional classification that may better lend itself to transdiagnostic, integrative treatment (see Figure 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology resulting from a quantitative nosology approach to classification of psychopathology. The lowest level of the hierarchy includes discrete symptoms that align into maladaptive traits or symptom components before coalescing into syndromes of disorders. Constructs higher in the taxonomy are broader and increasingly more general, to the point of a general P factor (e.g., Caspi & Moffitt, 2018). Areas with dashed lines are considered provisional and in need of further study. ADHD = attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; GAD = generalized anxiety disorder; IED = intermittent explosive disorder; MDD = major depressive disorder; OCD = obsessive–compulsive disorder; ODD = oppositional defiant disorder; SAD = separation anxiety disorder; PD = personality disorder; PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder. Adapted from “The hierarchical taxonomy of psychopathology (HiTOP): A dimensional alternative to traditional nosologies,” R. Kotov, R. F. Krueger, D. Watson, T. M. Achenbach, R. R. Althoff, R. M. Bagby, . . . M. Zimmerman, 2017, Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 126, p. 462. Copyright 2017 by the American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
Statistically derived by an international consortium of leading multidisciplinary nosologists, HiTOP reflects an empirical approach to hierarchically grouping common treatment targets into a coherent and dimensional taxonomy (Kotov et al., 2017; Ruggero et al., 2019). By moving away from consensus diagnoses of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, quantitative nosology may improve reliability and validity as well as provide better targets for psychotherapy research and treatment. COVID-19 is forcing us to upgrade and rethink the technologies of our practice, but it also provides an opportunity to update and rethink many of the other tools we use.
Global Reach

As I previously noted, JPI is a truly international journal with an extensive reach across every region impacted by the pandemic, including those locations where psychotherapists are faced with limited access to evidence-based resources. As a result, JPI and this special issue are uniquely able to aide psychotherapists around the world in accessing timely, high-quality scholarship as they grapple with the move to telepsychotherapy. Long-term readers of JPI are aware that the title, abstract, and keywords of every article published in JPI over the past few years have been translated into both Chinese and Spanish. These translations are printed in every issue and are electronically available within major databases (e.g., PsycInfo; PsycArticles). Authors are overtly asked to ensure their abstracts are maximally useful with awareness that, for some readers, this may be the only information they are able to digest.
In addition, full-text JPI articles are made available at no or low cost to thousands of local not-for-profit institutions in more than 120 low-income countries around the world as part of the World Health Organization’s Hinari program (www.who.int/hinari). Articles appearing in JPI attend to global needs via careful consideration of the larger international context for the implications of their work. Within this special issue, as just one example, authors span the globe representing multiple pandemic hot-spot regions, cultures, topics, and areas of expertise. The cross-pollination of ideas would be exhilarating if not for the dire circumstances that have led to their compilation.
Special Issue Context

Psychotherapy in the age of COVID-19 has been profoundly transformed. It is quite probable that psychotherapists themselves may also be changed in important ways as the pandemic progresses. Psychotherapists are no more immune from transformation than clients in the face of significant, life-altering experiences. JPI’s June 2019 special issue on Psychotherapist Transformations seems prescient in that regard. I can honestly say that, if you are fortunate to have lived much life, every single article in the Psychotherapist Transformations issue is likely to resonate. Although print copies of the full issue have sold out, the lead article remains available through open access and each of the other articles remains accessible electronically. The complete table of contents, including linkage to the open-access lead article, is available at https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/special/5682902. I strongly encourage readers to view that special issue as an important companion to this issue.
Companion articles are also available in the June issue of the journal Practice Innovations (PI). With more than 60 high-quality articles submitted for consideration of publication in this special JPI issue, a few select submissions that were promising but not strongly psychotherapy specific were transferred over to PI (with author permission) for consideration of publication in that journal. Readers can view the table of contents for that issue via the PI homepage (https://psycnet.apa.org/PsycARTICLES/journal/pri/5/2).
As evident from those articles selected for publication in this special issue, submissions spanned new empirical findings, substantial grant-funded projects, national-level task forces, and/or international collaborations. Peer reviewers from around the world, themselves impacted personally and professionally by the pandemic, provided expert review within days of being asked. To be clear, the peer-review process was not truncated for any article appearing in this special issue. Authors were remarkably swift and responsive, as we collectively understood the pressing need for this issue. The translation team completed independent forward/back translations on a rolling basis in record time to ensure the global reach intended. The publisher as well as the entire production team is appreciated for prioritizing and expediting their work on this issue to ensure it entered production on time. Finally, the Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration is greatly appreciated for expanding the page allocation to allow this special issue the maximum impact and reach.
Importantly, our work is not over. This issue will not be the last installment of contributions within JPI. I would like to ask for the help of authors, reviewers, and readers in continuing to press forward with infusing psychological science aimed at addressing the myriad pandemic-related mental health consequences that continue to unfold. More specifically, in light of the global economic impact associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, JPI has issued a call for articles on economic insecurity and deep poverty (details for submissions are posted on the JPI homepage at https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/int/?tab=4). Highly industrialized countries are seeing food shortages, and unemployment rates have already reached levels not seen in this lifetime across many regions of the globe. It will be important that psychotherapists have the resources and tools they need to provide the highest quality of care as more and more individuals find themselves facing economic insecurity or deep poverty. I look forward to receiving articles prepared to address that challenge.",
"11": "The coronavirus-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) was declared a national emergency in the United States on March 13, 2020. In response to public health warnings about the high virulence and transmissibility of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the potential for catastrophic loss of life, more than nine in 10 American residents are under government instructions to stay home as of this writing. The sweeping disruption in human travel, economic activity, and health care resulting from these mitigation efforts and from the surging infection rates that threaten to overwhelm the U.S. health care system has been staggering.
This disruption extends also to psychologists’ and other health service providers’ ability to meet in person with their patients, clients, and examinees and has resulted in a broad and sudden reliance on synchronous (live) videoconferencing (also commonly referred to as telehealth, telepsychological practice, and telepractice) to deliver clinical services. For practitioners who have little or no previous experience with delivering psychological services via telehealth, this could mean running afoul of federal and state laws for protecting the security of electronically transmitted personal health information.
The Security Rule provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA; 1996) and its various state progeny require covered entities to develop and follow policies and procedures to restrict access to, protect the integrity of, and guard against unauthorized access to electronically transmitted personal health information, including specifications for integrity control and encryption. The Office for Civil Rights (OCR; 2020) of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is responsible for federal enforcement of violations of the HIPAA Security Rule technical safeguards provisions (2013). However, in recognition that health care professionals who would ordinarily be subject to the HIPAA Security Rule may, during this national emergency, provide telehealth services through remote communications technologies that “may not fully comply with the requirements of the HIPAA Rule,” the OCR issued a Notification of Enforcement Discretion for Telehealth Remote Communications During the COVID-19 Nationwide Public Health Emergency (Notification; OCR, 2020) that effectively waives penalties for noncompliance with the HIPAA Security Rule “in connection with the good-faith provision of telehealth using such nonpublic facing1 audio or video communication products during the COVID-19 nationwide public health emergency.” The OCR noted that “[t]his exercise of discretion applies to telehealth provided for any reason, regardless of whether the telehealth service is related to the diagnosis and treatment of health conditions related to COVID-19.” Some state licensing boards also have suspended or relaxed regulations prohibiting interjurisdictional telehealth practice by psychologists not licensed or registered in the state in which the patient or examinee resides, although other boards have not (Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, 2020). Practitioners are urged to check local laws in relevant jurisdictions before engaging in interjurisdictional practice and to keep current with evolving pertinent federal and state regulations.
In the context of these and other national and state public health emergency waivers, it may be tempting to ignore or attempt to skirt psychological standards of care, but practitioners do so at their own, and perhaps also their clients’, peril. In contrast to aspirational standards of practice, a standard of care reflects the usual and customary professional practice in the community. In medicine, “crisis standards of care”—defined as “a substantial change in usual health care operations and the level of care it is possible to deliver, which is made necessary by a pervasive (e.g., pandemic influenza) or catastrophic (e.g., earthquake, hurricane) disaster” (Institute of Medicine, 2009, p. 3)—are invoked by a formal governmental declaration of such an emergency to facilitate “the necessary tasks of allocating and using scarce medical resources and implementing alternate care facility operations” (p. 3). But, as nominally implied by the concept of crisis standards of care, even in a crisis, there remain established standards for delivering care. “Ethical norms in medical care do not change during disasters—health care professionals are always obligated to provide the best care they reasonably can under given circumstances” (Institute of Medicine, 2009, p. 2).
A vital component of psychological practice involves the administration of psychological testing, particularly in clinical settings and specialties that rely heavily on the use of assessment instruments (e.g., forensic psychology, neuropsychology, police and public safety psychology). Remote administration of psychological testing presents challenges that cannot be ignored, even in a crisis, without risking the violation of ethical standards and without compromising the reliability and interpretability of test results. We illustrate this point and provide practical guidance for the remote administration of the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) instruments, both because they are the assessment instruments with which we have the greatest experience and because remote administration of the MMPI instruments was not available prior to the COVID-19 crisis. Although the principles underlying our advice are generalizable to other assessment instruments with remote administration capability, readers are advised to consult the test publisher for specific direction on how to achieve similar protections.2
Remote psychological testing involves Internet-delivered administration of a psychological test at a remote location rather than in person and administered by a practitioner or a trained assistant. The Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists (Joint Task Force) published general guidance on telepsychological practice, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013). Although these professional practice guidelines provide little practical instruction on how to ensure adherence to applicable ethical standards when administering psychological tests remotely, they do highlight an issue that is fundamental to understanding the common challenge in remote psychological testing. Guideline 7 states,
When a psychological test or other assessment procedure is conducted via telepsychology, psychologists are encouraged to ensure that the integrity of the psychometric properties of the test or assessment procedure (e.g., reliability and validity) and the conditions of administration indicated in the test manual are preserved when adapted for use with such technologies. (p. 798)
There is ample evidence that the reliability and validity of MMPI test scores are preserved when the test is administered by computer or tablet (e.g., Finger & Ones, 1999; Forbey & Ben-Porath, 2007; Menton et al., 2019; Roper, Ben-Porath, & Butcher, 1995). The second recommendation, that the conditions of administration indicated in the test manual are preserved, is the key challenge associated with remote MMPI administration.
Administration guidelines articulated in the various MMPI instrument manuals identify the need for supervised test administration. For example, the MMPI-2 Restructured Form (MMPI-2-RF) administration guidelines indicate:
The Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (Standard 5.6) require that test users make reasonable efforts to protect the integrity of test scores by eliminating opportunities for test takers to obtain scores fraudulently. Although the MMPI-2-RF is a self-administered test, completion of the inventory should be supervised by a qualified user or a technician working under the supervision of a qualified user. Adequate supervision ensures that the test taker completes the inventory on his or her own, that any unusual events that may occur during testing are recorded and can be considered in the interpretation of the test results, and that conditions conducive to obtaining optimally valid information are maintained. Supervision does not require that the individual administering the test be in the same room as the test taker throughout the session, although it is desirable that the test taker be within the supervisor’s line of sight (emphasis added). MMPI-2-RF materials should not be sent home with test takers, nor, in institutional settings, should test takers be allowed to complete the instrument in their rooms or anywhere else in which supervision is not possible. The standards (5.7) also state that test users are responsible for protecting the security of test materials at all times. (Ben-Porath & Tellegen, 2008/2011, p. 19)
These administration guidelines reflect three ethical standards (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017) pertaining to assessments: (a) Standard 9.02 (requiring psychologists to administer tests or instruments “in a manner” that is “appropriate in light of the research on or evidence of the usefulness and proper application of the techniques”); (b) Standard 9.06 (requiring that, when interpreting assessment results, “psychologists take into account . . . the various test factors . . . that might . . . reduce the accuracy of their interpretations”); and (c) Standard 9.11 (requiring psychologists to “make reasonable efforts to maintain the integrity and security of test materials”). When relying on remote test administration, these ethical standards can best be followed by reliance on an on-site proctor. The Joint Task Force (2013) Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology indicate that psychologists may consider the use of a trained assistant (e.g., proctor) to be on premise at the remote location in an effort to help verify the identity of the client/patient, provide needed on-site support to administer certain tests or subtests, and protect the security of the psychological testing and/or assessment process.
If feasible, the availability of an on-site proctor who can carry out the tasks just described would best meet the need for supervised MMPI administration. However, the use of an on-site proctor can be accomplished properly only in settings in which a noninterested party is available to perform the proctoring tasks (e.g., a trained proctor at a public safety agency for whom the psychologist is conducting a preemployment psychological evaluation). If such an arrangement is not feasible, remote supervision—using an appropriately trained and supervised proctor—can be accomplished via audio-visual monitoring, with the aid of a synchronous (live) teleconference application. The test taker should be seated such that they can be observed by the individual supervising remote administration of the test and audio (should be enabled and kept on so that the supervisor and test taker can communicate with one another and the supervisor is able to hear any communications or possible disruptions that occur during the testing session). Appropriate precautions should be taken to properly identify the test taker and their location (in the event of an emergency requiring notification of local authorities). Any unusual events that may occur during testing should be noted and considered in the interpretation of the test results (e.g., a brief loss of Internet connectivity that is quickly restored may not be expected to meaningfully affect the interpretation of test results, in contrast to an interruption that precludes completion of the remote assessment until a day or more later). With these principles in mind, we offer the following specific recommendations for remote administration of the MMPI instruments using Pearson’s (the test distributor) Internet-based platform, Q-global. Although, as we noted earlier, users of other assessment instruments are advised to consult the test publisher for recommendations on how to achieve similar protections, the following guidance applies generally to self-report instruments with remote administration capabilities.
Practical guidance for remote proctoring with Pearson’s Q-global Remote On-Screen Administration (ROSA) system when proctored via telehealth follows.
Select a Teleconference Platform That Conforms as Close as Possible to Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule. (2013) Requirements

Although the HHS announced that the OCR will not take enforcement action against HIPAA violators, there is no reason or need to willfully choose a nonsecure telecommunications technology when a HIPAA-compliant option is readily available. Indeed, notwithstanding the HHS notification of the OCR’s discretionary waiver of enforcement action, it is important to note that the waiver applies only “in connection with the good faith provision of telehealth using such nonpublic facing audio or video communication products during the COVID-19 nationwide public health emergency.” This implies that practitioners are expected to put forth a good-faith effort to provide telehealth services that conform to HIPAA requirements while waiving penalties for the use of technology that may unknowingly or unwittingly fall short.
An APA practice advisory (American Psychological Association Services, Inc., 2020), FAQs Practicing Psychologists Have About COVID-19, includes a response to the question, “What is the effect of HHS waiving HIPAA fines?” The advisory points out that “the notice is vague about what other HIPAA provisions related to telehealth HHS will not enforce. Despite this notice, the APA recommends that practitioners use a telehealth platform vendor that will sign a [business associate agreement] and that claims to be HIPAA compliant.” The practice advice cites five reasons for this recommendation: (a) “The notice still recommends doing so to better protect patient privacy. It also lists such vendors”; (b) “using a HIPAA-compliant vendor now will save practitioners from having to switch vendors and learn a new system once the crisis is over” (indeed, it is likely that many practitioners will continue to integrate telehealth into their practices even after the national health emergency ends); (c) “[t]he HHS Office of (sic) Civil Rights does not have authority to waive any similar requirements in state law”; (d) “the notice doesn’t suspend enforcement regarding your overall practice and HIPAA compliance”; and (e) “psychologists should not count on nonenforcement of any HIPAA requirement not directly related to providing telehealth.”
Concerns about the security of some teleconferencing platforms have been well publicized and warrant careful consideration when selecting a vendor. In addition to strong encryption capability, other features that enhance security and reduce the likelihood of hackers or uninvited participants from gaining access to the telehealth session include (a) requiring participants to use a unique password to participate in the session; (b) the ability to lock the session once the examinee and the proctor have joined the session, thereby preventing others from entering; (c) the use of a waiting room in which participants initially enter after identifying themselves and allowing the proctor to deny access to uninvited persons; (d) the option to prohibit participants from renaming themselves; and (e) disabling the share screen feature.
We emphasize in this context that Pearson’s Q-global system does not include an integrated telehealth delivery platform. Remote administration of the MMPI instruments requires that the examiner combine use of Q-global to administer the test (as described next) with a HIPAA-compliant telehealth service such as those that were just described.
Ensure That the Proctor Is Able to Observe the Test Taker Before Providing Access to the Test

One of the security features of Pearson’s Q-global ROSA web-based application—instructions for which are available on its website3—is that a test administrator first creates a record for an examinee and then assigns one or more specific assessments. The assessment can be given in one of three ways: (a) traditional paper-pencil format, with the scores entered by the test administrator into the Q-global system (manual entry option); (b) on a computer or tablet provided by the test administrator or proctor (on-screen administration option); or (c) on a remote computer or tablet away from the test administrator (ROSA option). It is this last option that is the focus of our guidance.
In the ROSA option, the test taker is administered the MMPI after clicking on a link, provided within an e-mail invitation that immediately connects to the test. A test administrator can e-mail the invitation either to the examinee or to someone other than the examinee. It is important to never send the examinee the invitation until the test administrator or proctor is present (physically or via teleconference) and able to confirm:
the examinee’s identity,
the examinee completes the inventory on his or her own,
any unusual events that may occur during testing are noted so that they can be considered in the interpretation of the test results,
the testing environment is (and remains) conducive to obtaining optimally valid information, and
test security is maintained.
In practical terms, this means either sending the invitation to someone other than the examinee (i.e., the person who will be proctoring the remote testing session) or sending it to the test taker only after establishing the telehealth connection. Confirmation that the testing environment is private, conducive to testing, unaided by a third party, and secure may also be facilitated by an environment check at the start of the test session, in which the proctor asks the examinee to temporarily reposition the webcam to display the surrounding area.
Document the Use of Remote Test Administration and Telehealth Proctoring Both in Your Informed Consent Procedures and in Any Written Report, and Obtain All Necessary Consent for Remote Test Administration and Proctoring

In addition to the obligation all psychologists have for obtaining and documenting informed consent when providing professional services (APA, 2017; Standard 3.10), state law may also impose specific requirements when engaged in telehealth. For example, California Business and Professions Code § 2290.5(b) stipulates:
“Before the delivery of health care via telehealth, the health care provider initiating the use of telehealth shall inform the patient about the use of telehealth and obtain verbal or written consent from the patient for the use of telehealth as an acceptable mode of delivering health care services and public health. The consent shall be documented.”
Psychologists should always consider whether remote test administration is viable or advisable for a particular examinee or situation, irrespective of informed consent. Individuals with significant cognitive impairments, with severe mental illness, or who are at risk for suicide, may not be suitable for remote test administration. In addition, some forensic or other evaluations conducted in an adversarial environment may be ill suited for remote test administration.
Finally, evaluations that are governed by regulatory or institutional procedures may impose additional consent requirements. For example, when using telehealth to conduct any portion of a preemployment psychological evaluation of a California police officer candidate, the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST) advises psychologists to obtain both the advance approval of the hiring agency and the consent of the candidate (California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training, 2020). In addition, POST guidance includes the recommendation to “[s]tate in your written report when any portion of the psychological evaluation was conducted remotely” (California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training, 2020, p. 7).
Consider Using a Checklist to Ensure That Issues Unique to Remote Test Administration Are Addressed

In his 2009 bestseller, The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things Right, Atul Gawande (2009) made a compelling case for checklists to ensure that important actions are taken, and for pause points at strategic moments in a sequence of actions to confirm that the important actions have been taken. In Table 1,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Checklist for Conducting Remote Psychological Testing Proctored via Teleconference
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
we provide a checklist that may be useful in a variety of practice settings when administering the MMPI via remote on-screen test administration and when proctoring the testing session via teleconference.
Closing Comments

We conclude this brief guidance document with our response to concerns we have heard that remote proctoring as described in this document may not afford sufficient supervision of test administration, particularly with regard to maintaining test security, or that test users may opt not to adhere to practices such as those described here. We acknowledge that for some types of assessments (e.g., in the adversarial context of forensic assessment) remote test administration could create more problems than it solves. It is ultimately the responsibility of every practitioner to weigh the costs and benefits of this practice, which may vary from one case to another. In our opinion, the steps recommended here are sufficient to maintain the integrity of test results and the security of the MMPI test items. It is possible, of course, that unscrupulous users may fail to follow the guidance we have offered, but this concern is not unique to remote administration. The MMPI manuals indicate that in-person administration of the test should be supervised. This admonition also cannot prevent practitioners from sending booklets home with test takers or in the mail, for example. Introduction of new technology does present new options for mispractice. We do not believe that this risk should prevent the vast majority of ethically scrupulous providers from adapting their practice to challenging times and new technology. Nevertheless, remote MMPI administration does introduce some unique challenges, which this paper seeks to address.",
"12": "On March 11th, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 virus a pandemic. In light of the global health crisis, doctoral-level psychology training clinics were faced with numerous ethical, legal, and practical challenges related to maintaining clinical training and supervision in a manner that protects the health and safety of clients, graduate student psychology trainees1, and supervisors. Training clinics that were providing exclusively in-person services were tasked with deciding whether to close or rapidly transition to providing exclusively telepsychology services. Telepsychology is defined as “The provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies . . . including telephone, mobile devices, interactive videoconferencing, e-mail, chat, text, and Internet” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 791). While telepsychology encompasses a broad array of technologies, the present paper will focus on the transition to telephone and interactive videoconferencing services.
The scope of graduate student training in a university psychology clinic differs from other psychological services in that trainees’ work in a clinic setting must be observed and supervised. Trainees work under the credentials of a supervising psychologist, and university training clinics are also part of larger institutions that create potential logistical barriers to the adoption of telepsychology practices. Several published papers have provided descriptions of the stages of implementing telepsychology in U.S. university training clinics (Dopp, Wolkowitz, Mapes, & Feldner, 2017; McCord, Saenz, Armstrong, & Elliott, 2015); however, the present paper aims to build upon this existing literature by providing an overview of the factors and decisions North American doctoral-level psychology training clinics navigated related to the widespread and rapid transition from in-person clinical training and supervision to telepsychology and telesupervision during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Similar to the missions of teaching hospitals and academic medical centers, the mission of many doctoral-level psychology training clinics includes training the next generation of psychologists, providing client care, and conducting clinical research. Although the present paper reviews the decisions and implications relevant to doctoral-level psychology training clinics in North America, the content is also relevant to sites in other world regions that provide training to interns, postdoctoral fellows, and other professionals, sites conducting clinical research, and clinical service providers more broadly.
The present paper draws from and expands upon the resources and guidelines relevant to training programs that many North American associations, committees, and councils published in response to the pandemic (see Supplement A in the online supplemental materials available online for a compilation of these resources and guidelines). The aims of this paper are threefold: (a) to present findings from a survey of North American training clinic directors from the Association of Psychology Training Clinics (APTC) related to the transition to telepsychology; (b) to review considerations for and implications related to the transition to telepsychology on training clinics’ three objectives of training students, providing client care, and conducting clinical research; and (c) to delineate recommendations for clinic reopening and potential future closures as the pandemic continues.
The Need for Rapid Telepsychology Implementation in Training Clinics

In response to the physical distancing directives of the COVID-19 pandemic, training clinic directors were faced with making unprecedented decisions for their training sites. To capture trends in training clinic responses to the pandemic and inform the decisions training clinic directors were tasked with making, a survey was distributed to members of the Association of Psychology Training Clinics (APTC) via its listserv in the weeks immediately following the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States (March 11–31, 2020). APTC is the primary organization for directors and administrators of psychology training clinics, and its 182 training clinic members are primarily located in the United States and Canada. The survey included questions related to the operational status of the university and clinic, whether telepsychology services were being offered in clinic and/or from home, the telepsychology platform being used, and the degree to which assessments were being conducted via telepsychology. Training clinic directors or designated representatives from 51% (n = 93) of APTC member clinics, primarily (n = 89) within the United States, completed the survey online, and de-identified survey data were shared with the authors of the present article.
At the time of data collection, all responding sites indicated that their academic institutions were moving to online instruction. Additionally, 23.7% (n = 22) of respondents indicated that their training clinic was forced to close and discontinue services, at least temporarily. The remaining 76.3% (n = 71) of clinics remained open for services, with most clinics (65.6% [n = 61] of total; 86% of training clinics that remained open) reporting that their sites remained open primarily through the use of telepsychology and most commonly using the secure version of Zoom for health care as a telepsychology platform. Of the sites that remained open, fewer than 20% (n = 14) planned to continue offering assessment services to new clients via teleassessment; most either suspended assessment services completely (n = 30, 42.3%) or limited teleassessment to the completion of assessments and feedback sessions already in progress (n = 24, 33.8%); 4.2% (n = 3) did not respond. At-home telepsychology was a common clinic response to COVID-19. Of sites that indicated they were implementing, planned to implement, or were considering implementing telepsychology services, 80% (n = 56) reported they were offering or planned to allow trainees to conduct telepsychology from home.
Given the swiftness with which sites were required to enact contingency plans and the rapidly changing nature of the global health crisis, the responses to the initial survey may not be reflective of the longer-term actions North American training clinics will make to adapt to extended physical distancing measures. For example, sites that were “considering” (n = 4) or “developing” (n = 5) the option of telepsychology at the time of the survey may have since enacted this option. To examine evolving trends in clinic responses to the pandemic and the impact of the pandemic on clinical research in training clinics (results related to research can be found in the Conducting Research section), a second brief and anonymous survey was administered via the APTC listserv approximately one month after the initial survey (April 16–18, 2020). Responses represented 102 APTC clinics (56% of total membership). At the time of data collection, 94% of clinic directors indicated that their clinics were providing “most to all” (n = 33) or “some” (n = 63) of their typical services; only 6% of clinics (n = 6) were providing no services. Consistent with the results of the initial survey, respondents’ optional comments indicated that telepsychotherapy for current clients was most frequently described as ongoing, whereas assessments and new client services were most frequently described as discontinued. However, several directors noted that they were pursuing plans to resume these discontinued services.
Considerations for Training Students, Providing Client Care, and Conducting Clinical Research in the Transition to Telepsychology

In transitioning a training clinic to telepsychology, there are many factors to consider that are relevant to training clinics’ threefold mission of training students, providing client care, and conducting clinical research. Embedded within these factors are a variety of ethical, legal, and practical matters to be considered. In this section, considerations and recommendations relevant to student training, client care, and clinical research as training clinics transition to telepsychology are covered (see Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Key Considerations for Training Clinics in Transitioning to Telepsychology
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
for a summary of key points).
Training Students
Of paramount importance in training clinics is providing quality training experiences to aid in the development of future psychologists. Training clinic directors were tasked with making decisions about whether to close the clinic or transition rapidly to telepsychology. For clinics that elected to transition to telepsychology, there are numerous training-related factors that should be considered, including providing clear communication and rationale for procedures that differ from best practices, legal and ethical considerations, and practical issues such as adapting to telesupervision and managing trainee and supervisor distress.
Closing a clinic versus rapidly switching to telepsychology
As many North American university training clinics were closed to clients and often staff due to the pandemic, conducting business as usual was no longer an option, and many clinics were forced to decide whether to close entirely or transition swiftly to telepsychology. While this is a difficult process for any clinician who had not previously provided telepsychology services, it becomes particularly complicated for a training clinic due to the added layers of administrative oversight and the complexity of trainees’ legal standing, experience levels, and training needs. Telepsychology services may be constrained by laws or institutional policies that require clinicians to practice in a well-controlled clinic environment with on-site access to a supervisor; this simply may not be possible as clinics close and trainees and supervisors must work from home. Supervisors, whose licenses cover trainee work, may also be reluctant to allow trainees to provide services in a new, unfamiliar, modality. Supervision is likely to change as people work from home and on-site coverage disappears, and opportunities to observe trainees’ work live or via video recording may become more challenging. Institutional policies that require an often lengthy approval process for any software or technology may significantly interfere with clinics’ ability to access secure videoconferencing platforms and records storage.
As survey results indicated, many clinics quickly switched to telepsychology services during the pandemic, and trends from optional survey comments revealed that specific challenges depended on factors like clinic size and preexisting technology. Small clinics were often able to close by pausing services or referring a small client base elsewhere. Larger clinics that provide substantial services to the community frequently reported needing to transition rapidly to telepsychology to ensure continuity of care for clients. Clinics with online storage, remote access to records, and videoconferencing technologies available in their clinic or institution were able to transition more rapidly than those who had to identify appropriate technology and work with their IT departments to secure approvals and contracts.
Clearly, there are benefits and costs to closing a training clinic as well as transitioning rapidly to telepsychology. Clinics that remained open could continue to meet training and client care needs, but faced the challenges of preparing staff, supervisors, and students to engage in telepsychology, logistics of protecting session privacy and security, and ensuring appropriate supervision. Clinics that closed avoided potential concerns with trying to provide services that are less amenable to telepsychology (e.g., some assessments, high-risk clients), particularly with trainee clinicians, but faced an inability to meet client or training needs. For both decisions, solutions required extensive consultation within the institution, with local regulatory bodies, and across the profession for pragmatic advice and emerging best practices.
Train in best practices before making modifications
Students’ training experiences are likely to inform their ideas of legal and ethical practice, as well as their behavior as independent psychologists. Thus, it is important for supervisors in training settings to be clear with trainees that some of the platforms and practices being utilized during the COVID-19 pandemic are temporary accommodations to increase access to care based on temporary relaxation of some laws and guidelines and do not represent best practices in nonpandemic times. For example, restrictions related to communication modalities appropriate for telepsychotherapy may be relaxed in some jurisdictions in order to facilitate access to care. This means that a wider variety of platforms may be permissible; however, supervisors should attempt to have trainees use the most secure means of communication available before examining less-secure options. Additionally, for assessments, supervisors should avoid teaching alternate methods of standardized administration before students have a thorough understanding of standardized administration procedures. In sum, deviations from best practices that are adopted to accommodate the pandemic should be explained to trainees along with a rationale for the deviation. Trainees should receive instruction on ethical and legal telepsychology best practices outside of times of crisis, especially for trainees practicing telepsychology for the first time.
Legal considerations
There are several legal considerations when trainees deliver telepsychology services. Supervisors should first investigate whether their jurisdiction’s codes contain language related to disallowing trainees from providing telepsychology, and whether the liability insurance of the supervisor and trainee covers the provision of telepsychology. Supervisors also should consult relevant licensing boards to determine whether there are any continuing education requirements related to developing and maintaining competence in the delivery of telepsychology. Further, organizations that accredit psychology training programs have historically restricted the amount of allowable telesupervision and the types of telepsychology that could count toward training requirements. These guidelines have changed in some jurisdictions as a result of the pandemic and should be reviewed by supervisors prior to incorporating these telepsychology practices into training clinics.
It is also important for supervisors to consider and monitor the physical location of the trainees who are delivering telepsychology and the clients who are receiving services to ensure that the services provided are in compliance with regulations regarding practice within one’s jurisdiction. Of note, jurisdictional guidelines vary regarding the required location of both the provider and the client, and some jurisdictions offer temporary licensure/registration provisions to allow for temporary interjurisdictional practice. In cases in which a training clinic is located near a jurisdiction’s border, it is recommended that training clinics consult with their university’s legal counsel to establish a written plan for continuity of care for clients or trainees located in other jurisdictions.
Ethical considerations
Several ethical issues related to training need to be carefully considered when trainees deliver telepsychology, including building competence in telepsychology as well as maintaining documentation and recording sessions (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017).
Competence
At the most basic level, anyone providing telepsychology must demonstrate competence to do so. In recent years, organizations have published best practice guidelines for telepsychology (e.g., APA Telepsychology Guidelines; Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013) and offered high quality web-based trainings. As North American university training clinics have transitioned from in-person services to telepsychology, they have generally required that clinical supervisors and trainees carefully review best practice guidelines and participate in a web-based training before being allowed to practice telepsychology.
Maintaining documentation and recording sessions
Several privacy considerations are unique to training clinics when rapidly converting training clinics into telepsychology providers, particularly related to maintaining records and recording sessions. The pandemic has necessitated that many trainees provide telepsychology from personal spaces (vs. in the clinic itself), and trends in the optional comments of survey respondents indicated that university information technology (IT) departments helped ensure that trainees either had access to secure university computers or that personal computers were equipped with appropriate encryption and firewall software. To allow trainees and supervisors to access records and complete documentation remotely without saving files to local computers, some clinics reported allowing trainees and supervisors to access clinic computers using a virtual private network (VPN) and remote desktop. Other training clinics have had trainees save documentation directly into a secure, university-based cloud system such as Box or Microsoft OneDrive.
In graduate training clinics, services delivered by trainees are routinely observed by clinical supervisors in vivo or via audio or video recordings. As clinics transitioned to telepsychology, new ethical challenges related to the security of session videos arose. Most secure telepsychology platforms offer security features such as end-to-end encryption of data during sessions; however, many are not yet enabled to seamlessly allow confidential storage of the session recording. Consequently, many training clinics were forced to consider the costs and benefits of (a) not having supervisors review recordings, (b) allowing trainees to temporarily save video files to personal hard drives before uploading to a secure shared drive and subsequently deleting video files from personal hard drives, and (c) saving video files directly to the telepsychology platform’s cloud despite the cloud being unsatisfactorily protected. Informal review of APTC listserv discussions suggested that many training sites consulted with university IT departments, legal teams, and professional societies to determine which of these flawed options best maximized patient care and trainee skills development while minimizing risk. Some clinics implemented additional safeguards such as requiring trainees to sign an agreement stating that they would delete the recordings from their hard drive and recycling bin, and restart their computer after each video upload. Further, several clinics reported that supervisors would check in at each supervision meeting to ensure trainees followed this procedure.
Practical considerations
Among the practical issues for training clinics to address in transitioning to telepsychology are adapting to telesupervision and managing trainee and supervisor distress. Consideration of specific issues as they pertain to U.S.-based doctoral psychology training, such as HIPAA and compliance with APA and Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC) guidelines, are offered in Supplement B of the online supplemental materials available online.
Adapting to telesupervision
Although supervision is a core competency for health service psychologists, gaps in formal supervision training exist for many (Falender et al., 2004). During the pandemic, supervisors may have been tasked with rapidly transitioning to telesupervision without the requisite competence. To build competence, supervisors should consult with colleagues who engage in telesupervision regularly and adhere to local laws and regulatory requirements (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013).
According to the telesupervision literature, an existing, in-person relationship prior to telesupervision is beneficial (Martin, Lizarondo, & Kumar, 2018), and videoconferencing is the most appealing modality for supervisors and trainees (Inman, Bashian, Pendse, & Luu, 2019). Higher levels of competence in both supervision skills and telesupervision can lead to improved rapport with the supervisee compared to in-person meetings (Jordan & Shearer, 2019); however, the accessibility of the supervisor is critical to enhancing the supervisory relationship when using telepsychology (Martin et al., 2018). Telesupervision has been found to be a better fit for more autonomous, flexible, and pragmatic trainees who are vocal in expressing their needs (Jordan & Shearer, 2019; Martin et al., 2018).
In practice, it is recommended that supervisors build an accessible relationship by using a telepsychology platform that allows supervisors easy access to enter trainees’ sessions and supplementing videoconference supervision with exchanging written supervision plans in advance (Jordan & Shearer, 2019; Martin et al., 2018). Additionally, using effective communication strategies (e.g., more formal, slower speaking styles; practicing turn-taking; effective use of silence) can enhance telesupervision efficacy (Martin et al., 2018).
Managing trainee and supervisor distress
Training clinic closures and rapid shifts in service provision in response to the pandemic are likely to cause significant distress in trainees and supervisors. The logistics, legal details, and the inability to meet in-person all significantly increase this distress, on top of stressors related to any trainee or supervisor’s personal situation. To mitigate distress, training clinic directors should provide frequent and open communication with supervisors and trainees and set up virtual meetings to review rationale for policy changes and to allow others to provide input. Resources from the Council of Chairs of Training Councils (CCTC), the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), and the APA (see Supplement A in the online supplemental materials available online) can assist North American sites in conveying clear rationales to supervisors and trainees about the decisions being made.
Supervisors are on the front lines of helping trainees manage their distress. Strategies supervisors can use to minimize trainees’ distress include being available for consultation, presenting clear guidelines for delivering telepsychology, developing opportunities for virtual check-ins and support, and providing resources for additional basic needs, including financial, food, housing, and self-care resources. Supervisors should also remain mindful of trainee distress that may result from power differentials (APPIC, 2020). For example, trainees may experience distress due to having relatively less control over decisions that may impact their safety, training, and future employability, and trainees often have limited time and financial resources to manage these changes. Supervisors should communicate a sense of flexibility and calm during these changing and uncertain times. Conveying the importance of self-care is encouraged, and resources for provider self-care during COVID-19 are provided in Supplement C of the online supplemental materials available online.
Providing Client Care
Just as the transition to telepsychology has implications for student training, it has significant implications for client care. While not an exhaustive review of considerations for client care during transitions to telepsychology, this section highlights core ethical and practical considerations that are particularly relevant for supervisors to relay to trainees.
Ethical considerations
Privacy
In addition to technical efforts to protect the privacy of clients, training clinics should offer explicit instruction to trainees on “softer” ways to enhance confidentiality during the transition to telepsychology. For example, supervisors might consider instructing trainees to have discussions with clients about holding sessions in a private location, using headphones, adding white noise, and/or coordinating sessions during times others may be able to supervise young children. Trainees should also be instructed on how to implement these considerations in their own space. Ongoing assessment of the client’s privacy during each session is critical.
Informed consent
Telepsychology best practices recommend that clients and psychologists engage in an informed consent process before telepsychology services begin (e.g., APA Telepsychology Guidelines; APA, 2014). While many jurisdictions previously recommended that clinicians and clients meet in-person before deciding whether to engage in telepsychology, the swift emergence of COVID-19 forced many training clinics to initiate telepsychology before discussing it in-person with clients. As a result, training clinics should develop procedures to obtain telepsychology consent remotely. Options to obtain consent remotely include encrypted e-mail to send a consent form to existing clients before scheduling the first telepsychology session or verbally reviewing the telepsychology consent form with clients at the start of the first telepsychology session. Supervisors are encouraged to educate trainees about the aspects of consent that are unique to telepsychology, such as including a discussion of the limitations of privacy and the possibility of Internet security breaches. Training clinics might also consider having a licensed supervisor join the telepsychology informed consent conversation between the trainee and client to ensure that information is effectively communicated and understood. Limited access to printers, scanners, and fax machines can create challenges in obtaining written consent. In these cases, it is recommended that flexibility is used to allow for obtaining and carefully documenting verbal consent from the client and then adding consents with original signatures when they are eventually obtained.
Collecting fees
Educating trainees about the ethical nuances of collecting fees remotely is encouraged. Informal review of APTC listserv discussion suggests that some clinics elected to temporarily suspend charging for services, while others are continuing to bill for services received. Some training clinics are using existing online payment options, others are asking clients to mail checks after each session, and still others are asking clients to pay their balance for telepsychology services when in-person clinics reopen. It is also important to consider who has access to clients’ electronic payment information and whether these individuals are trained in maintaining the confidentiality of information. Trainees should be prepared to discuss with clients what the expectations for payment will be either prior to or at the start of the first telepsychology session. Furthermore, trainees will need instruction on how to address client concerns that will likely arise related to financial difficulties during the crisis that affect their ability to pay.
Practical considerations
Conducting teleassessments
Conducting teleassessments is likely to be novel for many supervisors and trainees; therefore, it is not surprising that more than half (55.9%) of responding APTC clinic directors reported they had suspended all clinical services or specifically suspended assessment services during the pandemic. While assessment procedures are typically taught to trainees via practice with in-person administration, training programs are encouraged to explore alternatives to teaching assessment, such as utilizing web-based systems (CCTC, 2020). Unfortunately, validity has not yet been established for crucial tests (i.e. cognitive and achievement tests) administered remotely.
Trainees and supervisors should review best practice guidelines on teleassessment (e.g., APA’s guidance on psychological teleassessment during the COVID-19 crisis; Wright, Mihura, Pade, & McCord, 2020). Although it is best to provide continuity of care for assessment clients, supervisors should discuss with trainees the importance of maintaining fidelity to standardized test administration to the extent possible, while also flexibly administering or substituting subtests when necessary and adhering to copyright laws.
Additionally, some training clinics have used flexibility in how they provide teleassessment services. For example, trends from optional survey responses suggest that some clinics encouraged trainees to complete the report writing phase in a secure manner, with the goal of providing feedback via a telepsychology session that may include the licensed supervisor. Others, while not able to complete batteries that include cognitive assessments, elected to administer briefer assessments (e.g., personality, behavioral) using tests available on web-based platforms. For those who plan to wait to complete assessments until in-person contact resumes, a plan to conduct a follow-up intake session to gather any changes in background history since the last visit would be wise. The final assessment report should include a clear statement that there was a gap in testing due to a global crisis. Child assessment reports should include a statement regarding schools’ switch to online instruction and its effect on learning, particularly those with disabilities, limited abilities in the language of instruction, and underserved populations with limited or no access to required technology. Finally, depending on the length of the pause in assessment services, trainees and supervisors should use clinical judgment as to whether any re-testing is necessary.
Ensuring the security of assessment tools during telepsychology is an important ethical issue to review with trainees. In recent years, many measures have become available for interactive online administration (e.g., the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI)-RF-2, the Behavior Assessment Scale for Children). Online administration prevents the client from retaining a copy of items. In response to the pandemic, many assessment companies have quickly developed strategies for helping clinicians provide teleassessment. Trainees should be instructed to follow publishers’ guidelines, which may include obtaining explicit written confirmation from clients that they will not reproduce or save any testing materials or record sessions. Additionally, supervisors should consider providing trainees with a test security checklist to complete at the start of each teleassessment, including ensuring that the client/guardian is the one completing the assessment, that there are no cell phones in the client’s possession, and that a stable and secure Internet connection is used. Overall, it seems that trainees should be able to administer many assessments via telepsychology while safeguarding the integrity of the measures.
Children and adolescents
Youth who were receiving psychological services prior to the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to need continued services during the period of physical distancing. There is evidence that phone consultation is inferior to videoconferencing for the psychological treatment of children and adolescents with regard to both clinical processes and client acceptability (Morgan et al., 2008). Trainees and supervisors should therefore make an effort to provide telepsychology via videoconferencing whenever possible. North American university training clinics typically provide sliding-fee services. As such, trainees and supervisors should be aware that lower-income families may not have access to the technology required for some types of telepsychology in their home. A recent analysis of nationally representative data from the United States determined that 94% of children aged 3 to 18 had access to a computer at home and 61% had both a computer and Internet access (National Center for Education Statistics, 2018); therefore, phone sessions with parents, older children, and adolescents may be the only feasible option in some cases both within the United States and in countries with less access to technology.
While the research base is small, there is evidence that individual cognitive and behavioral treatments, medication management, and group interventions can be effectively delivered to youth using telepsychology (Van Allen, Davis, & Lassen, 2011). Telepsychology interventions have been found to be effective for pediatric anxiety (March, Spence, & Donovan, 2009), depression (Nelson, Barnard, & Cain, 2003), and traumatic stress (Stewart, Orengo-Aguayo, Cohen, Mannarino, & de Arellano, 2017). There is significantly less research on teleassessment of children and adolescents, though it has been suggested that structured interviews and rating forms that have similar properties to those validated for use in teleassessment with adults ought to translate into practice with children (Duncan, Velasquez, & Nelson, 2014).
Telepsychology may not be appropriate for very young children and children with developmental disorders who may not understand the technology being used or be able to use it to communicate effectively with the psychotherapist (Van Allen et al., 2011). In these cases, trainees should consider focusing the intervention on the parent, and they should be aware that these clients may not be well-served by a rapid transition to telepsychology. Finally, trainees should review with guardians the importance of providing youth privacy during sessions, and also inform them how and when the clinician will provide them with updates.
Older adults
Older adults are at particular risk of severe outcomes associated with COVID-19 (Wu & McGoogan, 2020). Unfortunately, while telepsychology offers meaningful opportunities to improve the lives of older adults, evidence suggests that technology-heavy approaches to clinical practice may be challenging for older individuals, especially those with vision and memory impairments (Gell, Rosenberg, Demiris, LaCroix, & Patel, 2015). Providing thorough information to older adult clients regarding the use, benefits, and possible risks of telepsychology and obtaining their consent to proceed with these services is therefore critical (Demiris, Doorenbos, & Towle, 2009). Trainees should be encouraged to assess older clients’ access to and confidence in using relevant technology prior to initiating telepsychology services (e.g., in-person or by phone). Trainees and their supervisors should also establish procedures around how to manage possible interruptions to telepsychology sessions with older adult clients due to difficulties in using technology and should establish alternative means of quickly contacting clients and consulting with supervisors as needed.
In addition, attending to the specific emotional needs of the older adult population during the COVID-19 pandemic is imperative. Trainees should be alert to the possibility of increased emotional distress associated with enhanced risk of severe illness, hospitalization, and even death among older adult clients and their peers (Wu & McGoogan, 2020). Due to physical distancing practices, many older adults have lost access to valuable opportunities for socialization, which can have deleterious effects on cognitive functioning and overall well-being (Charles & Carstensen, 2010). Trainees should consult with supervisors about ways to encourage alternative forms of interpersonal connection and socialization among clients. Furthermore, it may be especially beneficial for trainees and supervisors to consider the individual and cultural diversity factors inherent in working with older adult clients around COVID-19. Supervisors should assist trainees in remaining open to the unique experiences of their older adult clients, including the ways in which they may demonstrate a more measured response and optimistic perspective around the risks of COVID-19 than middle-aged and young adults (Charles & Carstensen, 2010).
Refugees
Numerous cultural barriers to mental health services for ethnic and racial minorities exist (Leong & Kalibatseva, 2011) and extend to the provision of telepsychology services for refugees during COVID-19. Data from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR, 2019) reported that there were 70.8 million forcibly displaced people worldwide, including 41.3 million internally displaced people, 25.9 million refugees, and 3.5 million asylum seekers. Individuals who have been displaced represent a particularly vulnerable population, as many have endured political atrocities and traumatic experiences. Furthermore, there may be barriers to the effective use of telepsychology among refugee populations. One study found that only 45% of Syrian refugees who experienced posttraumatic stress symptoms were open to telepsychiatry (Jefee-Bahloul, Moustafa, Shebl, & Barkil-Oteo, 2014). Connecting Cultures, a program established in a U.S. clinical psychology training clinic (Fondacaro & Harder, 2014), initiated refugee telepsychology services during the COVID-19 crisis. Clients who had a trusted, in-person relationship with a psychotherapist prior to transitioning to telepsychotherapy appear to benefit from it, and they also receive cost savings associated with transportation and childcare. While language barriers represent the most significant obstacle that necessitates the use of interpreters for multiple languages and introduces complexities with synchronizing schedules, this is also the case with in-person services. Access to smartphones for telepsychology platforms is critical, as many adult refugee clients do not possess computers unless their children have access. Lack of technology or experience with specific technology by interpreters or refugee clients (or clinicians) also present challenges. Children who access services in a US-based training clinic (Connecting Cultures) who are familiar with technology, fluent in English, and integrated in the U.S. school system appear to benefit from telepsychology similarly to nonrefugee clients, although research is needed to support this claim.
Conducting Research
In addition to their primary functions of providing clinical services and student training opportunities, many psychology training clinics participate in clinical research. In total, 101 (55.5% of total membership) training clinic directors responded to survey questions related to clinic research on the second APTC survey (April 16–18, 2020). Because routine outcome monitoring (ROM) measures often serve as a rich source of data for clinic research, respondents were asked about the extent to which these measures were still being used. Of the 95 clinics that reported providing services, 62% were continuing to use their typical (n = 40) or modified (n = 19) ROM measures, 22% (n = 21) had paused ROM measures, and 16% (n = 15) reported they were not using ROM systematically prior to the transition to telepsychology. When asked about the status of clinic research projects, 40% (n = 38) indicated having active clinic research projects prior to COVID-19. Of these clinics, 50% (n = 19) reported being able to continue ongoing research, and 10.5% (n = 4) reported beginning new research. Optional narrative comments indicated that much of the ongoing research involved ROM data that were collected online or archival data that were accessible remotely. New research projects that were reported involved investigating the transition to telepsychology and COVID-19-related anxiety, with some projects pending Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. Fifteen clinic directors (16% of clinics reporting research activity) indicated that their clinics’ research had been discontinued due to COVID-19, with narrative comments indicating that this was typically because the research involved discontinued services (e.g., assessment) or required in-person data collection or data access. In only one case did a clinic director report that their IRB had stopped all research.
These results suggest that clinic-based research can continue during the transition to telepsychology, albeit with some modifications. Clinical research that continues or begins during the pandemic provides an opportunity to contribute to research on the impact of pandemics on psychological symptoms and service provision that could be very informative and impactful. If a clinic transitioned services to telepsychology, then some research projects (e.g., clinical trials, treatment outcome studies) may be able to transition to remote data collection. Notably, IRB approval should be secured for any alterations in study protocol or changes in method of data collection. If a clinic suspends services, and in-person data collection is prohibited, then some clinic research projects may need to be suspended until physical distancing is no longer required.
This is likely to be stressful for investigators, particularly students who are hoping to make progress toward their degrees. Training clinic directors may be able to assuage some of these fears by discussing alternate methods of data collection and advocating for changes in university and program policies to accommodate disruptions in research projects due to the crisis. Additionally, non-pandemic-focused clinical research that continues will need to be interpreted in light of the pandemic, as participants will almost certainly be impacted by the pandemic situation, and results may not generalize to clinical practice during nonpandemic times. Supervisors have an opportunity and an obligation to educate students, as both producers and consumers of clinical research, about the limitations and opportunities that such data present.
Recommendations for Clinics as the Pandemic Continues

As local health authorities begin seeing a sustained reduction in new COVID-19 cases and governments subsequently begin relaxing physical distancing orders, questions arise about when and how clinics should resume in-person services. As some pandemic models suggest there may be a second wave of the virus once the stages of reopening have begun, other important questions to consider are when and how clinics should advocate for subsequent clinic closures and resumption of primarily telepsychology services. In this section, specific recommendations are offered for how clinics could consider a phased reopening and when clinics should consider reverting to partial or full telepsychology as the pandemic continues.
Phases of Clinic Reopening
Several considerations can help guide decisions about when and how psychology clinics may be able to safely reopen to staff and students and resume in-person psychological services. When making these decisions, clinic directors should first consult current governmental and university-based guidelines on physical distancing and staged increases in onsite personnel. The following recommendations for how training clinics can approach a phased reopening process are based on guidelines published by the U.S. The White House (2020) in conjunction with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Although these guidelines were written for the United States, the recommendations are general enough to be applicable and useful to other world regions. This phased reopening approach should be based on up-to-date data and implemented with a purpose of mitigating risk of virus resurgence and protecting the most vulnerable.
Prior to beginning the first phase of reopening, training clinic directors should develop and implement a set of policies that will remain in effect for all phases of clinic reopening. These policies should be informed by current data and industry best practices regarding physical distancing, personal protective equipment use, temperature checks of anyone who enters the clinic, disinfection procedures for all rooms and materials between uses, and use of high-traffic areas (e.g., break rooms, waiting rooms). Additionally, symptomatic individuals should not return to work until cleared by a medical provider, and anyone who has been exposed to someone who tested positive for COVID-19 or traveled to an area of outbreak within the last 14 days should not come to the clinic. Policies and procedures should also be put in place for workforce contact tracing following an employee or client testing positive for COVID-19.
Once these policies have been implemented and local health authorities and governments deem it safe to begin a phased reopening process, phase one of reopening the physical clinic can begin. In the first phase, clinics providing telepsychology exclusively from home could begin gradually transitioning some carefully selected staff back to providing telepsychology from the physical clinic. To do this, the leadership team should identify a small group of staff to return to the clinic at spaced intervals (e.g., no more than 2–3 trainees present at any given time; one administrator works from the clinic M/W/F and another works from the clinic T/TH). Strict physical distancing protocols should be enforced for those working on site, including maintaining a recommended distance from others working on site, and limiting and/or closing use of high traffic areas such as break rooms or workstations that are in close quarters. In this phase, personnel who belong to a vulnerable group should continue working remotely, and anyone who is considered for onsite work should meet local health standards for returning to work (e.g., be symptom free for a minimum period of time; have tested negative for COVID-19 or have tested positive on an antibody test if available). Additionally, psychology trainees who feel conflicted between resuming service provision from the physical clinic and continuing physical distancing should consult with their supervisors about the ethical decision they face.
In the second phase of reopening, the clinic can carefully increase on-site activity and certain clients could be seen in-person at staged intervals. Care should be taken when deciding which clients would benefit most from a transition back to in-person services (e.g., clients awaiting cognitive assessment) versus which would benefit from sustained telepsychology (e.g., clients thriving in that format, immunocompromised clients) and which safeguards could be put into place to protect everyone involved (e.g., arranging psychotherapy rooms, waiting rooms, and workstations such that a minimum distance of 6 feet or 2 m can be maintained between individuals). In this second phase of reopening, personnel who belong to a vulnerable group should continue to retain the option to work remotely, and all staff, psychology trainees, and clients entering the clinic should meet local health standards for returning to work.
Finally, in the third phase of reopening, the clinic can resume full onsite functioning assuming no new outbreaks occur in the relevant geographical location. Clinics should adhere to any post-pandemic physical distancing recommendations put forth by local health officials. If a resurgence in virus spread occurs, clinics should remain ready to rapidly return to partial or full telepsychology services.
When to Advocate for Physical Clinic Closure
As clinics take steps toward reopening, it is critical for clinic directors to plan and prepare for the possibility that their region will experience a reescalation of COVID-19 cases and deaths. If this occurs, clinics may be encouraged or forced to physically close to clients and/or staff once again. If closure is not mandated, clinic directors may still want to consider whether to advocate for voluntary closure.
Several circumstances may increase the chance of a clinic electing to close in the event that virus resurgence that has not yet triggered mandatory closure. First, a clinic may have a large number of clients or staff at heightened risk of exposure to COVID-19 or for severe illness if infected (e.g., clinics that serve large numbers of older adults, individuals who are immunocompromised, health care workers, or communities of color that have been unduly impacted by the pandemic). Communication with clinic supervisors, trainees, and clients can provide important input regarding the extent to which individuals in these groups are concerned with remaining open. Examining clients’ requests for services and attendance/cancellation patterns can also provide this information. Second, a clinic may elect to close if they have inadequate resources to successfully manage in-clinic virus mitigation efforts. For example, in some clinics, the layout or size of psychotherapy rooms may not allow for a minimum physical distance of 6 feet or 2 m between a clinician and each client, or clinics may not have access to sufficient hand sanitizer, cleaning services or supplies, or personal protective equipment to meet safety standards. Third, a clinic may elect to close in advance of mandatory closure if they have had success maintaining adequate levels of client service and clinical training during prior closures. Especially for clinics with services that are amenable to telepsychology (e.g., ongoing psychotherapy), resources to provide remote services effectively (e.g., HIPAA-compliant videoconferencing and online records storage), and clients for whom telepsychology services are acceptable and accessible, closing may be minimally disruptive. Clear articulation of the relative balance of risk to clients and staff of staying open, access to appropriate health protections, and available options for maintaining client care and student training can be helpful in discussing closure with local administrators.
In many cases, however, the decision to reclose during a pandemic resurgence will not rest with a clinic director but rather will be made at the institutional or governmental level. Regardless of who makes the decision, there are several steps a clinic director can take to prepare for closure. In most cases, clinics will have already experienced a COVID-19-related closure and so will have already identified the technology, training, staffing, and other supports needed to maintain telepsychology, telesupervision, and other remote work. Steps to prepare for a reclosure include ensuring that needed software platforms are still available, that contracts are current, and that any temporary regulations permitting telehealth during the initial COVID-19 closure are still in place (e.g., if a clinic was using a less secure videoconferencing software that was temporarily allowed during the crisis, it will be important to check that this is still permissible). It will also be helpful to ensure that needed client records can be accessed remotely and that billing and collections can proceed. Clinic directors should also ensure that trainees, supervisors, and office staff have working webcams they can use from home and access to electronic and hard copy clinic forms and treatment manuals. New clients should also be given the option to consent to telepsychology at intake, even if it is not immediately applicable, and having clinicians use a small period of in-person session time to ensure that clients know how to access the relevant videoconferencing platform, follow links to online assessment measures, and contact their clinician in case of schedule changes or other between-session needs is recommended. Providing resources to assist financially disadvantaged clients secure free or low-cost Internet access and a smartphone or computer may be particularly beneficial in the event of rapid closure.
Discussion

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, results from the both APTC surveys suggest that the majority of doctoral level psychology training clinics in North America rapidly transitioned to providing services exclusively via telepsychology and that clinic-based research was largely able to continue, albeit with some modifications. Whereas in ordinary circumstances, a transition to telepsychology in a training setting would likely take several months, the majority of training clinics that responded to the first APTC survey reported that they made this transition within 2–3 weeks to accommodate governmental recommendations around physical distancing, and results from the second APTC survey confirmed that additional clinics transitioned to telepsychology the following month. The primary goals of training clinics are to train students, provide client care, and to conduct research, and the transition to telepsychology highlighted a host of ethical, legal, and practical factors for clinic leaders to consider in each of these domains. The lessons learned by training clinics in transitioning to telepsychology during the COVID-19 pandemic also informed the specific recommendations provided on how to enact a phased clinic reopening once it is deemed safe and how to prepare for subsequent reclosures should there be a resurgence of COVID-19 in the clinic’s local area.
While informative of the status of psychology training clinics during early phases of the pandemic, the APTC survey data should be interpreted in light of the fact that the data represent only half of the APTC membership, and reasons for nonresponse are unknown. It is possible that nonresponding clinics did not attend to the listserv or take time to respond due to heavy workloads during the pandemic, or that the survey questions were not currently relevant to their local situation. It is also possible that the lack of response reflected directors’ uncertainty regarding their clinics’ plans for telepsychology. Additionally, it is important to note that the survey results and recommendations were gleaned from North American clinics, and while the results and recommendations are likely to be relevant to clinics in other world regions, there may be nuances to clinical practice and training in other locales that are not captured in this paper. Overall, although the results of the first APTC survey were preliminary, the combined results of both surveys indicate that psychology training clinics in North America responded quickly to directives for physical distancing by largely transitioning to telepsychology services to ensure that training, supervision, and client care could continue.
It is challenging to identify the best ways to approach training in a novel and rapidly changing situation like the COVID-19 pandemic. Each decision affects trainees, clients, and agencies, and existing policies and practices are frequently a poor fit for the changing context. As the pandemic unfolded, the CCTC (2020), the organization representing programs and institutions responsible for doctoral, internship, and postdoctoral training in health service psychology across the United States and Canada, endorsed guidelines for principled decision-making for training in the context of COVID-19. The CCTC guidelines, followed by similar guidelines from APPIC (2020), include four principles relevant to the decisions that training programs, sites, and supervisors may need to make regarding whether, when, and how to transition from in-person services to telepsychology.
First, decisions must balance many — sometimes competing — considerations, responsibilities, and roles. Central considerations include the ethical, legal, and practical issues involved in implementing telepsychology, particularly in training clinics with little telepsychology experience. North American training sites must also attend to the implications of telepsychology for program accreditation, as well as for trainees’ ability to count these experiences toward internship or licensure eligibility. Underlying these considerations is the need to balance the dual mission of training programs to provide training to students and needed services to clients while maintaining personal and public safety.
The second principle provides some guidance around how to prioritize these issues by adopting a developmentally sensitive trainee focus. The CCTC (2020) notes educators should attend to the needs of their trainees, who will vary in developmental level and responses to the demands and stressors of the pandemic. A rapid transition to telepsychology may be necessary to facilitate service delivery, and it is also an opportunity for trainees to develop new competencies in both the service delivery modality and the process of quickly acquiring new knowledge and skills. As with any new competency, trainees will require time and support to develop proficiency.
The third principle — flexibility and creativity in developing trainee competency and meeting responsibilities — is likely the key to success in meeting the professional and personal challenges trainers face during the COVID-19 pandemic. As CCTC (2020) notes, the pandemic is an unprecedented situation; training and supervision simply cannot rely on established policies and practices. Using ethical and legal principles and best practices as a foundation, trainers have the obligation and opportunity to be flexible and creative as they meet the needs of trainees and clients. Policies may need to be modified or temporarily suspended, and expectations may need to be loosened as the immediate needs of trainees and clients take precedence over perfection.
Finally, the principle of social responsiveness urges trainers to make all decisions with a social justice lens that considers inequities and power differences that may impact trainees and clients. For telepsychology, these impacts may include the logistics of accessing sessions via computer or telephone, the ability to travel safely to the agency for required on-site activities (e.g., those who rely on public transit), and the potential differences in in-person versus telepsychology communication that may affect psychotherapy, assessment, or supervision. Trainers and supervisors hold the power and responsibility to advocate for trainee and client needs.
As the COVID-19 pandemic led training clinics to rapidly develop the infrastructure for telepsychology practice, several issues are critical for the field to address. First, as trainees are routinely evaluated on a core set of competencies, it will be important for the field to develop and adopt competencies specific to the practice of telepsychology. Once formal competency areas are established and widely accepted, leaders in the training field can work to develop and test the most efficacious ways for trainees to build these competencies.
Second, the current empirical literature is sorely limited with regard to studies testing the efficacy of telepsychology delivered by trainees. With the drastic increase in training clinics adopting telepsychology, opportunities for research related to training, supervision, and telepsychology will be ripe. Many existing studies that evaluate the efficacy and acceptability of telepsychology delivered by trainees (e.g., Simpson, Guerrini, & Rochford, 2015) and telesupervision (e.g., Jordan & Shearer, 2019) are limited by their lack of random assignment and small sample sizes. Teleassessment studies are rarer still. It will be important for randomized controlled trials to be conducted comparing the efficacy of trainee services when delivered by telepsychology versus in-person, telepsychology services provided by trainees versus experienced clinicians, and client outcomes when supervision is conducted via telepsychology versus in-person.
The long-term implications of this rapid transition to telepsychology student training, client care, and clinic-based research remain to be seen. Thus, reviewing the factors that can influence decisions about transitioning to telepsychology may help training sites plan for the future of training in health service psychology. Training clinics will need to consider whether and in what contexts to continue offering telepsychology services once the current global health crisis dissipates, and care will need to be taken to ensure that any policies and procedures that were adopted during the pandemic in response to relaxed legal guidelines are adapted to reflect the reinstated laws. The widespread adoption of telesupervision also has the potential to open doors for trainees to access specialized training experiences that are not readily available at their training site. Unlike past training cohorts, most current trainees will be moving into their careers with training in telepsychology, which is likely to have an impact on future clinical practice, training, and supervision in ways that may significantly increase access to specialized training opportunities and access to mental health care more broadly.",
"13": "Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19), a newly emergent infectious disease caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 virus, originated in December 2019 from mainland China (Li et al., 2020). The disease has rapidly escalated to a global pandemic, with more than 3 million cases and significant mortality by the end of April 2020 (when this issue was sent to production). Because of methodological differences in testing and case recording between countries, these numbers are also likely to significantly underestimate the true prevalence of COVID-19 in the population (World Health Organization, 2020). Alongside the impact on hospital and physical health care, the fast spread of COVID-19 has placed significant strains on providing mental health services by negatively impacting the capacity, availability, responsiveness, and resilience of public and private health care systems worldwide (Emanuel et al., 2020; Legido-Quigley et al., 2020).
There is emerging evidence of the psychological impact of COVID-19 on populations (Wang et al., 2020), both directly because of the distress accompanying confirmed cases in individuals and their loved ones and indirectly because of population health policy and interventions such as quarantine (Pancani, Marinucci, Aureli, & Riva, 2020). It should be emphasized that the majority of people are not expected to suffer from mental disorders emerging from the pandemic and its impact (Taylor, 2019). However, a significant percentage will experience intense emotional adjustment reactions, including fear of contagion (Zhou, 2020), impact of prolonged quarantine (Brooks et al., 2020; Xiao, 2020), the death of relatives (Wang et al., 2020), or increased social adversity as a consequence of geopolitical instability to civil society associated with the economic crisis (Silva, Resurrección, Antunes, Frasquilho, & Cardoso, 2018). Against a preexisting backdrop of increasingly stretched mental health services in developed and developing countries, the direct and indirect psychosocial effects of COVID-19 present an urgent challenge for mental health research, practice, and policy (Holmes et al., 2020).
In this context, increasing access to psychological therapies through technologically informed approaches (telepsychotherapy) presents an opportunity to adapt to the mental health care delivery challenges posed by COVID-19 while also supporting client choice around mode and flexibility of delivery. The collection of articles we comment upon highlight the potential of telepsychotherapy in the age of COVID-19. These articles offer readers a blend of reports of existing telepsychotherapy initiatives refracted through the lens of COVID-19 and reports of emergent empirical data pertaining to telepsychotherapy during the pandemic. We organize our observations on these papers through first identifying a range of core groups at risk for mental health sequelae during the COVID-19 outbreak. Second, we outline how the current collection of papers offer new perspectives on how to respond to these groups. Finally, we look beyond the curve to discuss recommendations and evidence on how to design and deliver telepsychotherapy in accordance with the challenges and limitations these reports highlight. It is important to note that appreciations included in this special issue also allow psychotherapists to prepare to enter any physical distancing situation they may face in the future, such as areas that lack local providers, crisis situations (e.g., conflict or natural disasters), or future health pandemics.
Groups at Risk During and After the COVID-19 Pandemic

It is possible to detect at least three major groups at risk for psychological morbidity during and after the COVID-19 pandemic (Inchausti, García-Poveda, Prado-Abril, & Sánchez-Reales, 2020). The first group are health care professionals, particularly those working in inpatient physical health settings, who experience higher frequency of exposure to the virus and higher viral load in the workplace; compounded by significantly increased workload, high-risk procedures, and the availability of necessary personal protective equipment. Evidence from the current, and previous similar, coronavirus outbreaks indicate health professionals are at risk of elevated levels of depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders (Al-Rabiaah et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020).
The second elevated risk group include individuals who, as a result of the crisis, have been exposed to potentially traumatic events such as loss of a loved one, threats to one’s health, and to the ability to work and make a living. These people may express symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, or complicated grief disorder, consistent with the literature on psychological and psychiatric sequelae of global emergencies or disasters (Goldmann & Galea, 2014). This group may not emerge immediately within the pandemic, and presentations may become apparent only after several months, even after the incidence of COVID-19 has peaked, as is the case with previous coronavirus outbreaks (Tsang, Scudds, & Chan, 2004). The emerging posthospitalization syndrome in survivors of COVID-19, which includes medical and psychological sequelae, is also a problem of growing concern in global health care systems (Stam, Stucki, & Bickenbach, 2020).
A third group of people at increased risk for psychological problems consists of people with preexisting diagnosed psychiatric disorders, especially those with severe or complex ones. Their existing presentation may be exacerbated by extreme isolation because of exposure to either the virus or associated physical distancing, and physical distancing may itself exacerbate previous experience of social isolation in this vulnerable group. It is this group that the insights from the current papers are most immediately relevant to, although we highlight that lessons can also be learned in terms of therapeutic process and signposting for the other risk groups.
Assisting Frontline Professionals, COVID-19 Patients and Their Relatives, and People With Preexisting Psychiatric Disorders

As Duan and Zhu (2020) highlight, specialized psychotherapeutic interventions for COVID-19 should be dynamic and flexible enough to adapt quickly to the different phases of the pandemic. This emphasis on adaptation and flexibility is a common thread, resonates with the recommendations made by all the authors in the special issue. As with previous crises (Mohammed et al., 2015), mental health emergency response includes in the early stages an active collaboration between clinical psychologists, psychotherapists, and psychological intervention specialists with the rest of the multiprofessional health care system in the treatment of the immediate impacts of COVID-19 presentations. This may take the shape of organizing or enabling health care systems to orientate toward psychological impacts of a pandemic, facilitate public mental health approaches to increasing population awareness of mental health, or organizing systems for psychologically informed interventions. This may also include task shifting of psychological interventions either to delivery through digital means or by different professional groups. According to these recommendations, a number of potential therapeutic targets can be identified.
Health Professionals
First is training and support for health professionals at high-exposure risk to identify and manage emotional reactions that may hinder their clinical work in frontline health delivery. The core driver here is promoting psychological resilience for professionals who have frontline duties during a pandemic (Chen et al., 2020). Key therapeutic targets may include managing anxiety, fear of contagion, episodes of acute stress, or promoting self-care/reducing burnout. The breadth of different approaches to telepsychotherapy and eHealth gives considerable scope to tailor potential interventions to the needs of health professionals, with Bennett, Ruggero, Sever, and Yanouri’s (2020) review delineating key aspects of what works for whom in eHealth. A related point is that eHealth is best placed to deliver when captured within an ethical evidence-based framework—a further theme of the papers. As an example, in acute health settings, interventions such as psychological debriefing, critical incident stress debriefing, or other single session intervention that mandate staff to talk about mental health responses are to be avoided, although compassionate and sensitive awareness of the impact of critical care on health care professionals remains a powerful and important principle.
Mental Health of COVID-19 Patients and Their Relatives
Second, addressing psychological distress among infected individuals and their relatives requires special attention. It is important to engage emotionally vulnerable groups, especially people with previous psychopathology when these individuals are undergoing COVID-19 treatment or in quarantine. Here opportunities for psychotherapy and indeed telepsychotherapy are limited, but the mental health symptoms of this group of patients with COVID-19 should still be monitored. Given physical distancing and hospital pressures, front-line psychological support needs either to be facilitated by medical staff involved in immediate care (which may not be possible if the health system is at capacity) or be implemented indirectly through telecare systems. Attention should also be given to relatives of patients admitted by the coronavirus in a severe condition, poorly prognosed, or who have already died. While addressing such individuals, it is essential not to pathologize normal emotional reactions of the family members, and it is important to establish clear and consensual criteria with all the professionals involved to determine whether intervention is likely to be beneficial (von Blanckenburg & Leppin, 2018). Normal reactions of grief are expected and the need for psychological support should be assessed. In this sense, Rosen, Glassman, and Morland’s (2020) paper provides a roadmap toward how clinicians can use telepsychotherapy technologies for providing strengths-based preventive interventions for coping with distress during periods of disruption, life threat, and loss and for delivery of effective treatments to people who develop chronic conditions in response to traumatic stress.
Adaptations of Psychological Interventions for Existing Mental Health Presentations
Third, when adapting psychotherapy delivery to a telepsychotherapy format for people with preexisting psychiatric disorders, continuity of care and continuity of therapeutic experience is highly important. In this regard, Hom et al.’s (2020) article presents encouraging preliminary data relating to a partial hospital program that serves acute psychiatric patients stepping down from inpatient hospitalization. The move to an online environment was accomplished with a high degree of acceptance from patients and staff, and the paper offers a useful account of the practicalities and pragmatics of doing so. Thinking across the spectrum of common mental health disorders, Bennett et al.’s (2020) review of reviews supports the view that outpatient psychological interventions targeting common mental health (i.e., depression, anxiety, or substance abuse) can be effectively carried out by telepsychotherapy, although the authors highlight mixed evidence with regard to recommendation around guided versus unguided telepsychotherapy, effectiveness against controls, and the potential for elevated attrition rates in telepsychotherapy. In addition, these authors point out that eHealth interventions have the potential to be an effective tool for redressing both new and old psychotherapy access barriers, particularly when engagement is boosted by use of (online) reminders and feedback. This is consistent with existing evidence that phone- and Internet-enabled psychological interventions are clinically effective in a wide variety of mental disorders (Irvine et al., 2020). Turning to more specialized populations, DeLuca et al.,’s (2020) paper highlights the need for youth at clinical high risk for psychosis to receive telepsychotherapy during the COVID-19 outbreak. These authors highlight the need to maintain engagement via online methods but also highlight the potential for psychological distress to be exacerbated, with corresponding risks for subsequent vulnerability to psychosis and other mental health problems. We draw attention to DeLuca et al.’s mapping of target risks (e.g., stress sensitivity, suicidality) to psychiatric best practice, implications from psychotherapeutic principles (e.g., cognitive-behavioral therapy), and adaptation to a telepsychotherapy format. In a similar vein, there is increasing concern that the mental health impacts and wider socioeconomic ramifications of COVID-19 may increase suicide risk across populations (Gunnell et al., 2020). In relation to individuals with high risk for suicide, Jobes, Crumlish, and Evans’s (2020) describes adaptation of a suicide-focused and evidence-based intervention—the Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality—for delivery via telepsychotherapy. These authors highlight that the existing framework for Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality offered a baseline structure for adaptation to the COVID-19 challenge and aligns with other suicide prevention resources. This therapeutic pragmatism and pooling of resources are a further emergent theme of the mental health response to the pandemic. Finally, although the rates of infection and hospitalization for COVID-19 are thus far relatively low in children and young people, there is an awareness that children are at risk both directly of mental health sequelae (particularly in the case of children with existing health conditions) and indirectly because of social and economic impacts on families. Again, a pragmatic approach building from existing evidence base has much to offer. In reviewing their use of telepsychotherapy treatments with children with neurological conditions and their families, Wade et al. (2020) offer a strong evidence base, both in terms of effectiveness and in process-driven adaptations for delivery of telepsychotherapy to children and families. Their broad overview grounded in two decades of implementation research offers important insights into effective approaches for young people and families including online family problem-solving treatment and online parenting skills training. These authors also draw attention to the impact of differing levels of socioeconomic strata, which leads us to caution that the move to telepsychotherapy does carry risks in terms of digital disadvantage for clients and families with limited access to fit-for-purpose technology. Similarly, Riegler, Moscato, Narad, Kincaid, and Wade (2020) report that online parenting skills for military veterans can be effective to support at-risk families while also promoting positive parent-child interactions and family functioning during (and potentially beyond) the COVID-19 crisis.
Going Beyond the Curve

The papers in the special issue largely focus on adaptations to existing approaches, based on emerging research. However, it is important to take a long view and look at the implications for mental health as the pandemic plateaus. Implicit in this view is a recognition that COVID-19 presents as an infection that is highly likely to occur in waves, with the potential for alternating periods of less and greater physical distancing. In the long term, mental health stakeholders are preparing for an increase in mental health symptoms such as hypochondriasis, anxiety, insomnia, or acute stress as well as symptoms consistent with PTSD across health systems. The likelihood is that this work will involve eHealth to a greater extent and also include telepsychotherapy. Evidence-based psychotherapies will be crucial here (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2014; 2018). An example of this is the article by Stewart et al. (2020) demonstrating pilot feasibility and effectiveness data on outcomes for trauma-focused cognitive-behavioral therapy delivered via telepsychotherapy in children and adolescents aged 7 to 18 years with PTSD. However, the strong theme of ethical practice that emerges through the papers collected underscore that formal psychotherapy still requires careful assessment as a first step and active monitoring throughout. Special attention should also be paid to: potential for retraumatization of PTSD presentations in which trauma-focused psychotherapies are implemented without adequate psychotherapeutic frameworks and structures (Duckworth & Follette, 2012); and guarding against the development of interventions for those who have recovered from COVID-19 that stigmatize or block access to a new functional identity as survivors of the pandemic (Muldoon et al., 2019). Evidence from West Africa of psychological stigma relating to Ebola survivor status is instructive here (Hoover, Merenbloom, & Johnson, 2018). Individuals affected by COVID-19 also should be encouraged to retain a sense of their overall identity, rather than have identity subsumed into survivorship.
It is also important to recognize that COVID-19 has already created the conditions for societal rupture across economic, social, and political levels. Therefore, the work of mental health systems going forward may well sit within a social determinants of mental health model (e.g., Lund et al., 2018). Because the impact of the pandemic is expected to be manifested across different life domains, mental health professionals might need to collaborate with other professionals such as occupational counselors to address the need to find a new job for their clients.
Current and Emerging Challenges From the Pandemic

In organizing psychological assistance within and across various stages of the pandemic, we highlight four major challenges:
First, health care systems include deficits in material, and human resources carry risk of rendering them less responsive to psychological aspects of the pandemic. For instance, deficits such as lack of specialization in crisis interventions (Shultz, Baingana, & Neria, 2015; Shultz & Neria, 2013) and scarcity of human resources may lead to accumulating multiple responsibilities, which in turn reduce the effectiveness of interventions (Duan et al., 2020).
Second, there exists a very real danger that the public underestimates the (short- and long-term) psychological consequences of pandemics. Although accumulating evidence exists with regard to psychological distress, it is not clear whether policymakers will emphasize mental health, particularly in low-resource and conflict settings.
The third challenge relates to poor planning and coordination of psychological interventions, especially when they are applied at different levels and by different professionals (Zhang, Wu, Zhao, & Zhang, 2020). In China, at the start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the absence of adequate planning of psychological interventions led to fragmented or disorganized implementation, compromising effectiveness and efficacy and hampering access to available health resources.
Finally, there is risk attached to early crisis responses, leading to a proliferation of interventions and frameworks associated with an oversupply of well-intentioned but potentially nonevidence-based psychological assistance, often nongovernmental organizations and the third sector. This is not to say all nongovernmental organization interventions are compromised, and indeed, prevention in mental health is highly desirable. However, delivery of preventive interventions must be balanced by delivery and/or supervision applied by appropriately qualified professionals (Loewenstein, 2018; Ogden, 2019). Although general in nature, these concerns are equally applicable to both psychotherapy and telepsychotherapy. In reviewing the 28 popular English-language mental health mobile apps, Wang, Fagan, and Yu (2020) noted that only five were found to have strong empirical support. In addition, few empirical studies fully evaluate negative or harmful effects of app delivery, although iatrogenic risks of mobile applications have been identified.
Maintaining the Quality of Therapeutic Experience for COVID-19 Telepsychotherapy

What key considerations are there for practice and technique in adapting telepsychotherapy to the demands of a COVID-19 and post-COVID therapeutic landscape? Again, clues can be drawn from existing best practice in telepsychotherapy. As Daele et al. (2020) recommend, design and provision of high-quality telepsychotherapy interventions require to be tailored and personalized to clients by professionals and organizations, involving the clients in the entire development and implementation process. Where health services, regulatory agencies, and developers have enough flexibility, there is scope that those with existing mental health conditions should continue their psychological interventions by technology-enabled means (Bennett et al., 2020; Hames et al., 2020; Hom et al., 2020; Jobes et al., 2020; Rosen et al., 2020). Alongside this, psychotherapists attitudes, competence, and confidence in adapting psychotherapy are vital. As Békés and Doorn (2020) report in their cross-sectional survey of psychotherapist attitudes toward online psychotherapy during COVID-19, there is already evidence across multiple therapeutic modalities that psychotherapists across continents have been able to adjust their own and clients’ expectations of psychotherapy to an online environment with broadly positive findings in relation to confidence. However, it is important to note that therapist fatigue and lack of confidence link to negative attitudes to telepsychotherapy, signaling the need for education, support, and supervision. As we go forward, qualitative methodologies are of value in deconstructing therapist experience of COVID-19 telepsychotherapy. MacMullin, Jerry, and Cook (2020) give us much to consider in this regard there with specific challenges emerging such as familiarity with the technology (both psychotherapist and client), adaptation of the therapeutic intervention, awareness of the additional parameters of delivering psychotherapy in lockdown conditions, potential misunderstandings and miscommunications, potential benefits and risks (e.g., limits to patient confidentiality), and the accompanying question of the purpose of psychotherapy in such unusual circumstances.
Regarding the quality of the therapeutic alliance in face-to-face psychotherapy versus telepsychotherapy, Watts et al. (2020) reported that telepsychotherapy did not interfere with the establishment of the working alliance over the course of the treatment in patients with generalized anxiety disorder. On the contrary, these authors reported that clients showed a stronger working alliance in telepsychotherapy delivered in videoconference than in conventional psychotherapy. This alerts us to the potential for unexpected opportunities in telepsychotherapy. Indeed, attunement to the therapeutic relationship and detection of ruptures in clients that are in the process of or have already switched to telepsychotherapy is an important aspect of technique. For example, consistent with principles for identifying and repairing alliance ruptures (Safran & Muran, 2000), the therapist may first ask for feedback about the new condition: “How do you feel seeing me on video? How is it to you showing elements of your home? Do you sense I’m close as before or more distant?” Similarly, attention to nonverbal markers becomes even more important. On video, facial markers are relatively easy to detect, whereas attention to the nonverbal dimension requires some adjustment. The clinician may note the patient’s posture (e.g., slouching), which may be a sign of depression or lack of trust and confidence in the modality, or that they are looking elsewhere. The clinician can gently note these markers and bring them to the center of the conversation. To collect more information, the clinician may ask the client to zoom out, where possible, so a larger part of the body becomes visible and signals from the upper part of the body become easier to detect.
Importantly, telepsychotherapy may well call for telesupervision. In fact, physical distancing makes this a necessity. Tarlow, McCord, Nelon, and Bernhard’s (2020) study uses a multiple baseline single-case design to compare the relative effectiveness of in-person supervision and telesupervision. The results obtained suggests that supervisees reported similar levels of supervision satisfaction and supervisory working alliance during in-person supervision and telesupervision. Supervisees’ emphasis of supervisor characteristics, including openness, supportiveness, and empathy, underscores the importance of the supervisory relationship, regardless of supervision format. Supervisees also emphasized the importance of supervisors’ competence with supervision technology. These authors suggest that for some jurisdictions and organizations, adherence to existing supervision standards may be sufficient for the provision of telesupervision that is acceptable, effective, and ethical, although additional research comparing the effectiveness of supervision formats is recommended. Therefore, clinicians, providers, and policymakers weighing the benefits of telesupervision against its potential risks must therefore balance the directive to do no harm (nonmaleficence) with the goals of promoting health (beneficence) and providing equitable access to care for all (justice). Mental health care providers adopting telesupervision can also seek out and consult with colleagues who are experienced with telepsychotherapy and telesupervision during this period of transition. We suggest there is a synergy here. If psychotherapy is delivered in an online environment, there is a certain intuitive fit to also supervise or receive supervision in an online format—If supervisors model the process, this may help supervisees increase familiarity with the systems and process while also normalizing the experience.
Similarly, there is a need for synchrony between training, client care, and research. Hames et al. (2020) present findings from a survey of North American training clinic directors from the Association of Psychology Training Clinics related to the transition to telepsychology. These authors blend short-term response with a range of recommendations going forward for clinic reopening and potential future closures as the pandemic continues. Although focused on the United States, this approach gives useful insights for training programs in other countries and regions.
In summary, based on the papers in this special issue we have reviewed, we endorse the key themes of flexibility, ethical integrity, and trying where possible to integrate telepsychotherapy into existing treatment systems and paradigms. Based on our own observations, we also add the following points to guide clinicians in adapting telepsychotherapy:
Transparency in setting up and implementing therapy—This may include drafting of psychotherapeutics contracts.
Balancing normalization with distress. During pandemic and physical distancing situations, affect is heightened—Transient emotional states such as fear, anger, anxiety, obsessions, guilt, constriction, rebellion against authority, emotion, and behavioral dysregulation are to be expected (both from clients and clinicians). Normalization is vital to acknowledge the common humanity of the situation—that suffering is human and mostly unavoidable but that ongoing, stable, or severe distress should not be ignored or minimized. Common factors (e.g., Norcross & Lambert, 2019) are also more important than usual. Adjustment to the new normal is normal and patients’ experience is human. Where sharing and self-disclosure are appropriate, psychotherapists’ sharing of similar may reduce feelings of self-shaming, self-criticism stigma, or guilt for one’s own weaknesses. While maintaining self-monitoring, clinicians may disclose moments in which they experienced more transien, but more acute feelings of anxiety, anger, and so forth than one ordinarily would (Dimaggio, Ottavi, Popolo, & Salvatore, 2020). This helps create a sense of human connection and reduces in-session risk on the client’s side of self-blaming or setting unrealistic standards of good mental health for the self.
Give consideration to the therapeutic environment. Working from home or an unusual space requires choices around background, use of nonverbal cues, and the balance of using video to create a more usual environment, balanced against the anxieties of clients (and perhaps psychotherapists) of relating in an unusual situation. In a similar vein, psychotherapists may need to discuss and guide clients around how the client constructs their online space for psychotherapy.
Creativity. Whereas for some clients the restrictions of physical distancing may require psychotherapy to take a more immediate focus on managing distress and maintaining self-regulation, therapists may still be able to use a digital environment creatively to explore and expand the healthy self (Dimaggio et al., 2020). The profound changes involved in living with and through physical distancing may enable psychotherapists to help clients draw links from present experience to lifelong vulnerabilities, giving new opportunities for therapeutic work such as linking behavioral avoidance to schema (Inchausti, Prado-Abril, Sánchez-Reales, Vilagrà-Ruiz, & Fonseca-Pedrero, 2018) or behavioral experiments (such as where clients are in lockdown with partners of families).
We emphasize that these recommendations have relevance beyond the current crisis and may even help many psychotherapists unfamiliar with telepsychotherapy to approach this modality. The flexibility of telepsychotherapy offers opportunities to reach clients who do not have access to face-to-face psychotherapy in their locality or struggle to engage because of professional or logistical pressures. Take the example of a client in the creative industries who because of work relocation had switched to telepsychotherapy prior to the pandemic. After the onset of physical distancing, this client experienced a relapse in her interpersonal difficulties alongside pandemic-exacerbated health anxiety. Physical distancing limited the scope for behavioral experiments. However, a combined experiential technique using art, mindfulness, and guided discovery was possible via telepsychotherapy (Dimaggio et al., 2020). Coupled with therapeutic role play, this enabled the client to connect with her negative affect and cognitions while also noting an improvement in her creativity. For both psychotherapist and client, the analogy we draw here is with playing music—The practice may at first feel forced and stilted, but as both parties adjust to the subtleties and opportunities of an online environment, creative approaches to psychotherapeutic technique can be unlocked.
Conclusions

The COVID-19 pandemic creates major challenges for provision of mental health services in general and specifically psychotherapy. These challenges are likely to substantially change the way we conduct psychotherapy in the medium and long term. However, these challenges also create opportunities for innovation—of which the current potential of telepsychotherapy is an excellent example. There are a number of groups that may benefit from telepsychotherapy including health care workers engaged in frontline response to the pandemic and their patients; individuals with new mental health distress as a function of COVID-19 diagnosis, or losing family and loved ones to the illness, or the psychological effects of prolonged physical distancing; and individuals with existing mental health conditions. In pivoting telepsychotherapy to meet increased need and reduce treatment burden, the papers collected in this issue offer ample material to inform practical considerations and technique and address questions of effectiveness in telepsychotherapy. Going forward, evidence-based telepsychotherapy will require consideration of appropriate trial designs and implementation science to address questions of outcome and effectiveness but also process and qualitative research to inform our understanding of technique and practice. In uncertain times we can and will be able to get beyond the curve. Finally, the value of this special issue, and indeed telepsychotherapy, extends beyond the current pandemic. Telepsychotherapy offers promise for psychotherapists to prepare for future physical distancing situations and may even offer opportunities to expand psychotherapy provision in challenging environments in which access to mental health care because of crisis, conflict, or natural disasters may be compromised.",
"14": "Provision of psychological services has gone beyond the walls of the independent practice office, hospital, community agency, and clinic, as well as beyond the restrictions of access and waiting lists, illness, disability, work, stigma, relocation, and even weather. Telepsychology has connected clients with psychologists in ways that traditional “in-office” therapy could not, enhancing continuity and specialization of care.
One tool of telepsychology has been used by clinicians for many years, yet its users likely did not think they were engaging in the practice of telepsychology. Because telepsychology is defined as “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 791), clinicians who have used telephone, mobile devices, and faxes when working with clients have been practicing telepsychology! Advances in telecommunications have expanded the practice of telepsychology to include providing psychological services using devices and activities such as interactive videoconferencing, e-mail, chat, and text, not to mention Internet use with blogs, self-help websites, and social media (Campbell, Millán, & Martin, 2018). Interactive communication with clients that occurs within real time, such as on the telephone or using videoconferencing, is often referred to as synchronous, while communication using e-mails, faxes, or discussion forums is considered asynchronous. A more thorough explanation of the advantages and disadvantages of these two modalities can be found in Cooper, Campbell, and Smucker Barnwell (2019).
Telepsychology can be used to augment in-person psychotherapy sessions or as a primary method of providing services. Common uses of telepsychology to augment in-person sessions include telephone sessions to check on progress or to deal with an urgent matter, e-mailing supplemental information or links to resources, texting appointment information; using mental health apps for monitoring or tracking behaviors, and having clients complete online testing or assessment instruments.
Risk Management Tip: Psychologists must attend to the privacy and security of communication methods—for example, using secure e-mail for sending Protected Health Information (PHI), encryption for cell phones, and informing clients of the risks.
Security measures evolve as threats and breaches of protection occur—a highly recommended product or service may quickly become no longer secure. Become familiar with resources that review the status of products and services. Consult with those informed about changes in technology and protection and reassess often the measures you have taken to ensure they are still supported.
Telepsychology is a viable and valuable resource for psychologists and the public. It is incumbent on those practitioners who are considering adding telepsychology to their practices to understand its potential for providing needed, quality services; what knowledge, tools, competencies, preparation, and ongoing training are essential; the guidelines and regulations that govern the legal and ethical practice of telepsychology; and risks and risk management strategies.
Risk Management Tip: Psychologists must seek out appropriate training experiences to develop and maintain competence in delivering telepsychology services.
Ongoing training experiences in areas of clinical, technical, emotional, and cultural competence can be obtained through webinars, workshops, research reviews, and consultation. Because this is a developing modality of practice, remaining current about developments in technology; ethical, business, and regulatory issues; clinical outcome studies; and factors that impact delivery of services is essential.
Why Is This a Growth Area?

Individuals seeking psychological services have faced barriers that have often prevented access, resulting in failure to receive needed mental health care. Telepsychology can reduce or eliminate significant challenges to mental health care access. Correspondingly, telepsychology also offers opportunities that are not feasible with in-person services. Several of the major barriers and opportunities are described below.
Geographic Barriers
Rural life has been identified as a challenge for mental health services because of its multiple-relationship dilemmas, the plight of health disparities, physical inaccessibility, and information deficits. Given basic technology access, videoconferencing is now possible with basic technology training for the client regarding security, confidentiality, and protocol for access and data management. The preference for remote access remains a facility-based location rather than the home; however, for geographically limited individuals, access to any community facility is often not reasonable. Telepsychology, therefore, offers the opportunity for mental health services independent of location and physical access, which, in turn, has great potential to significantly increase mental health treatment for this population.
Lower Socioeconomic Status
People living in poverty experience multiple barriers, some of which are within the context of the client’s variables and others caused and maintained by the environment and individuals within the systems people in poverty must navigate. In order to attend in-person psychological services, people living in poverty must step outside of their environments in often intimidating and anxiety-producing circumstances. They must make their way to an office in an often new and unknown location; be prepared to engage with staff asking insurance, copay, and other questions that could be embarrassing; be in the presence of others in the waiting room and the staff who may have all the appearances of middle-class characteristics; and, once in the room with the practitioner, be unsure of understanding what will be happening. The intimidation factor can be greater than the anticipation of useful help, and services are not sought.
Social Isolation
Individuals who might otherwise seek mental health services may live in rural, small town, or urban areas, but if they are experiencing depression, anxiety, or other symptoms that isolate them from their community or from others who would otherwise be within their support circle, then physical access to services is irrelevant. The isolated only become more isolated as they withdraw from information access, cultural events, entertainment, sports, church, and community activities. These individuals then become invisible to their own communities and known friends and associates. Telepsychology is an opportunity for individuals to commit to a gradual reentry into their work and social communities by engaging in services that do not require that they initially leave their comfort zones.
Transportation and Financial Barriers
Individuals living in urban areas can experience as much difficulty with transportation as those in rural living. Typically, the transportation barriers are no availability, prohibitive expense, or unreasonable time consumption. Financial barriers extend beyond the fee for service and can double given the cost of transportation, length of time away from work to go to and from the session, and other fees. Navigating insurance plans, understanding contractual parameters, and garnering the persistence to successfully overcome both transportation barriers and financial red tape are often factors in premature termination. Telepsychology removes these obstacles, although the cost of services remains. However, the removal of other costs and logistical barriers is a significant advantage in seeking and continuing with mental health services.
Attitudinal Barriers
Although public information and education campaigns, as well as other service efforts, have made significant inroads on the stigma of mental health needs, the stigma has not been overcome among many who would benefit. Family bias, cultural beliefs, societal stereotyping, and the anticipation of shaming and ridicule prevent many individuals from accessing the services they need. Individuals who are members of marginalized populations may be reluctant to seek services given historical exploitation and maltreatment. Telepsychology affords privacy and protection from external sources of criticism and from engagement with others regarding services. Individuals who are self-critical, however, may still experience some stigma, but the privacy of telepractice and the competence of the clinician can increase self-acceptance for services.
Physical Limitations
Marginalized populations include those with physical as well as cognitive limitations. Clinicians must carefully assess the appropriateness of telepractice, particularly for those with hearing or speech difficulties, language differences, and cognitive limitations that could be aggravating factors related to needed technology competencies, emergency responsiveness, and understanding the limits of confidentiality. With some exceptions as cited, those with physical limitations have an opportunity that would be prohibitive for in-person services.
Access to Specific Expertise
Specialty practices have been developing in recent years that afford individuals treatment in eating disorders, dialectical behavioral therapy, trauma therapy, substance abuse, and other targeted treatment needs. Those who have overcome or not experienced the other barriers mentioned may find that practitioners are not available in their community who can competently treat their specific concerns. Interjurisdictional practice remains a limitation depending on the location of the client and practitioner; however, within a state or jurisdiction, practice across a distance is an opportunity afforded by telepractice that eliminates travel and additional logistical barriers.
Practical/Logistical
Traditional practices for in-person psychological services have been accepted over the years as ethical and professional protocol. Many of these practices are in and of themselves prohibitive for seeking services. For example, the 50-minute hour assumes once a week, typically a regular time for in-office treatment. Individuals who have multiple jobs, irregular job schedules, or no control over their work demands are often not able to meet the 50-minute hour convention. Those who have children, family members who are ill, and responsibilities for others may not be able to predictably schedule in advance. Telepsychology would still require planning and scheduling; however, the challenges presented by additional time requirements and unpredictable variables can be resolved more easily through telecommunications.
Mobility
As mentioned, interjurisdictional limitations still exist and are discussed elsewhere in this article; however, for intrajurisdictional telepractice, services would no longer need to be discontinued for the length of time the client or clinician is out of town. Telephone communication has, of course, been an integral part of psychological practice for many years, but the advent of inexpensive videoconferencing capability makes real-time, synchronous telepsychology available for most individuals.
Risk Management Tip: Make a determination about using telepsychology primarily based on appropriateness for the individual client.
Once you have decided on using telepsychology with a client, document what variables you considered; your thought process, including how you will continue to assess the appropriateness of this modality; and your client’s response.
Clearly, telepsychology can overcome many barriers and increase access to needed services. Knowing how best to provide those services ethically and legally is important to ensure delivery of quality and effective psychological services.
Interjurisdictional Practice
As described earlier, the benefits of telepractice include the ability to reach populations across state lines that might not have had access to services previously and to provide continuity of services to existing clients. For example, it allows us to treat someone in rural areas where traveling to treatment centers may be too cumbersome or to continue treating clients who are transferred for extended periods to another state due to work.
State policies typically address how you can provide telepsychology within the state; however, clinicians must be aware that each state has its own set of laws and regulations about how it permits psychologists from outside its jurisdiction to treat its residents. Some states allow provision of services for limited periods of time without formal notification of the psychology boards, others require permission/notice prior to starting services, and others will allow out-of-state psychologists to treat its residents only if the psychologists are also licensed in the state where the client is located (i.e., where its residents live and its board has regulatory jurisdiction). Psychologists should be aware of the requirements and expectations of the jurisdiction into which they are practicing. These additional considerations may impact a psychologist's decision whether to provide the services via telecommunication technologies or refer to a local provider.
Risk Management Tip: Psychologists are strongly encouraged to consult with their professional liability carrier, colleagues, and professional association to make a risk management decision about providing telepsychology services across state lines (DeMers, Harris, & Baker, 2018, p. 162).
There have been efforts to address the discrepancies between states to make the provision of vital services less constricting for the provider while also ensuring services from qualified providers for the community. In addition to psychology, several professions (e.g., medicine, nursing, physical therapy) have utilized an interstate compact structure to meet these needs. At the time of this writing, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) has established the Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT), an interjurisdictional compact that will facilitate the practice of telepsychology across participating state lines through Authorization to Practice Interjurisdictional Telepsychology and allow for temporary in-person, face-to-face psychological practice for up to 30 workdays per year through Temporary Authorization to Practice. This agreement between participating states will facilitate continuity of care when the client relocates or travels, certify that psychologists meet acceptable standards of practice, promote cooperation in licensure and regulation between PSYPACT states, grant compact states authority to hold licensees accountable, increase consumer protection across state lines, and promote ethical and legal interjurisdictional practice.
PSYPACT became operational in April 2019 when the required seventh state (Georgia) enacted legislation. There are currently 12 states that are part of the compact (Arizona, Colorado, Delaware, Georgia, Illinois, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, Oklahoma, Texas, and Utah). PSYPACT has active legislation in North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Washington, DC, and prefiled bills for 2020 in Wyoming and Kentucky.
The Commission, the governing body of PSYPACT, responsible for its oversight and creation of its rules and bylaws, was also established in April 2019. Each participating PSYPACT state selects its own commissioner to serve on the Commission and participate in this process. It held its first meeting in July 2019, where it elected officers and drafted its bylaws. At the time of this writing, The PSYPACT Commission has finalized its bylaws and is currently in the process of drafting and finalizing rules that will further define requirements for practice under PSYPACT. For more information, resources, and ongoing developments about PSYPACT, please go to PSYPACT.org.
What Do I Need to Know?

There are many opportunities for psychologists to use telepsychology as a primary method of providing services or as a supplement to benefit clients, and as with in-person provision of services, there are many responsibilities—some similar and some different. Fortunately, there are many resources to support psychologists in this new area. Some of those (e.g., Telemedicine Guidelines) originate in other professions and are useful in providing new points of information and guidance for initiating telepsychology. For psychologists, however, the foundational resources are the profession’s Ethics Code, the Telepsychology Guidelines, and one’s jurisdictional statutes and regulations. These resources support the maintenance of professional practice behaviors, decision making, and the ability to understand and convert ethical in-person practice to telepsychology.
In 2011, a joint task force was created by Dr. Melba Vasquez, then president-elect of the American Psychological Association (APA), to develop guidelines for psychologists for the practice of telepsychology. The task force included and was cochaired by representatives of APA, ASPPB, and the American Insurance Trust (The Trust). The task force focused on identifying aspects of the use of telecommunication technologies that differ from the in-person provision of services. Eight guidelines were established: Competence, Standards of Care, Informed Consent, Confidentiality, Security/Transmission of Data, Disposal of Data, Testing and Assessment, and Interjurisdictional Practice. The guidelines, which were approved in July 2013, are intended both to educate and to inform psychologists in their practice in applying current standards of professional practice when using telecommunication technologies in providing psychological services.
Telepsychology is not a specialty but rather is a modality that extends in-person standards of practice to telecommunication. Telepsychology does not draw upon or derive from new ethical standards but introduces the need for awareness of additional factors, decisions, and actions that arise in the context of electronic transmissions (Cooper, Campbell, & Smucker Barnwell, 2019). Seven of the eight APA Telepsychology Guidelines (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013) are, in fact, standards of the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (APA, 2017). Competence, Standards of Care (which is nested in Competence), Informed Consent, Confidentiality, Recordkeeping (i.e., Security and Transmission of Data and Disposal of Data), and Testing/Assessment are major sections of the APA Ethics Code and are foundational concepts that frame psychologists’ decision making. Interjurisdictional practice is the only Telepsychology Guideline not inherently represented in the APA Ethics Code. Given the diverse and broad spectrum of professional psychology, some may ask if the APA Ethics Code and the Telepsychology Guidelines apply to all areas of psychology. The APA Ethics Code and the Telepsychology Guidelines are written for clarity and utility and for that reason cannot offer greater specificity for all areas of practice but are meant to be applicable to all. Telepsychology Guidelines, albeit not enforceable, are intended to lend direction for adherence to the standards of care.
Psychologists are knowledgeable of the APA Ethics Code principles and standards. Such understanding provides a strong foundation for psychologists as they begin their orientation to telepractice. The standards of care for in-person practice are not diminished or altered for telepsychology, and therefore, an understanding of the factors introduced by electronic communication is essential. The remainder of this section will highlight the telepsychology aspects of the APA Ethics Code toward the maintenance of standards of care as detailed in the APA Telepsychology Guidelines (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013).
Risk Management Tip: Psychologists consider clinical, ethical, legal, and risk dimensions when considering the practice of telepsychology.
Know where to find important guidelines and keep them easily accessible. Remember, too, that guidelines and standards are important, but so is ensuring your understanding of those resources, how they are interpreted by other professionals, and how they can be applied.
Competence
In addition to clinical competence, which is expected for in-person practice, psychologists additionally engage in education and training to ensure technical competence. Further, psychologists will want to assess their clients’ technical competence to participate in telepsychology and do have the responsibility, not necessarily to provide but to ensure client competence. An important aspect of self and client competency assessment is the awareness and understanding of the impact language, culture, disability, and other diversity factors may have on psychological services provided through this modality.
Risk Management Tip: Take reasonable steps to ensure your intellectual competence, technical competence, emotional competence, and cultural competence, as well as to protect clients and others from harm.
Self-assessment is important, but seeking out objective feedback with a colleague, a peer consultation group, or mentor about your competence level is also important. Psychologists will want to assess the appropriateness of teleservices for each client, determine pros and cons, and document their decisions. Should treatment effectiveness not be evidenced in telepsychology, psychologists will want to transition to in-person practice or refer the client.
Standards of Care
Psychologists are aware of the growing means of electronic communication in addition to the gold standard (i.e., synchronous, face-to-face videoconferencing) such as e-mail, texting, and telephone. Psychological services are likely to increasingly include social media platforms. An early step in preparation for telepractice is a risk-benefit assessment for each client regarding the client’s clinical needs, logistical factors, cultural variables, and any relevant factors to treatment effectiveness. Particularly important is an assessment of the “medical conditions, mental status, and stability, psychiatric diagnosis, current or historic use of substances, treatment history, and therapeutic needs that may be relevant” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 795).
Risk Management Tip: Conduct a conservative assessment of a client’s diagnosis, history, and risk level and determine that these factors do not contraindicate providing services via telepsychology.
Seek risk management resources, including consultation, which identify high-risk populations and other factors that may interfere with effective use of telepsychology.
The most desirable condition for telepsychology is for the client to be physically located at a facility in which the requirements for privacy, confidential exchanges, and absence from distractions are ensured. Psychologists will make decisions about the remote environment and whether it meets the same standards of practice as in-person services. If clients are located in personal space, such as one’s home, or in public space, the conditions for services can be compromised. If others are in the room, distractions and loss of confidentiality can occur, and depending on the level and quality of the platform used (e.g., videoconferencing vs. e-mailing), someone other than the client could be responding. Unless psychologists have agreements with clients to meet these standards, others could be sitting across the room influencing the client, children/adults could be passing in and out of the room, and someone else could be texting or e-mailing the clinician rather than the client. Monitoring of these conditions is an ongoing process, not an initial assessment only.
Informed Consent
The APA Ethics Code identifies the key elements of informed consent that are necessary elements of professional practice in psychology.
Risk Management Tip: Clinicians should thoroughly inform clients of what they may expect in terms of services offered, unavailable services, access to the practitioner, emergency coverage, and similar issues.
Psychologists are encouraged to review available resources, including sample informed consent documents, and make a checklist of important areas to cover. Additionally, they should document the process as well as any notable exchanges with the client.
Telepsychology requires new and essential components to informed consent of which psychologists must be aware in order to maintain standards of care. For example, in-person services do not present the risk of a client appearing for an appointment at midnight, or technology interruption preventing the last half of the session, and billing would not vary with each session. Some of the important, newly introduced factors that should be addressed in the informed consent include the following: (a) Boundaries of communication should be agreed on before beginning services. Psychologists might want to establish a separate e-mail and phone number and other means by which clients initiate contact. Psychologists who often return a text message on Saturdays and then fail to do so on one occasion could have established the expectation of Saturday services by clients, which would be a risk factor in an emergency situation. Acceptance of nonemergency e-mails and other asynchronous communication establishes flexible boundaries and reasonable client expectation of the psychologist’s availability. Asynchronous communication for substantive content should be avoided; exceptions could be changing appointments and logistical information. (b) Technology interruptions are unexpected and can interfere with or terminate communication. Psychologists should develop a procedure to be enacted in these situations. Clients should agree to the procedure and understand what to do. Technical competency of clients comes into consideration in clients’ knowing how to avoid accidental transmission of messages to others and in exercising vigilance in the method of responding. Use of social media is particularly vulnerable to accidental misdirection or nonconfidential communication. (c) Billing for telepsychology services is unique in that sessions may vary in length; psychologists may bill differently for texting, phoning, e-mail, and videoconferencing. These variations should be determined in advance of services, agreed upon by clients, and prominent in the informed consent.
Risk Management Tip: If third parties are billed for services offered via electronic means, practitioners must clearly indicate that fact on billing forms.
Billing codes are standardized, so psychologists are encouraged to consult with colleagues and their professional association to ensure knowledge of and access to current codes, keeping in mind they may change over time.
(d) Engagement in initiating, maintaining, and responding to telecommunications by clients is much more extensive than in in-person service. Psychologists may include in informed consent the responsibilities of clients to participate in maintenance of standards of practice.
Informed Consent Self-Assessment Checklist
Did I inform patients/clients/consultees how I will communicate with them using technology, what type of information is appropriate to share over this modality, and the time frame they may expect a response?
Did I have a plan for how I will react if I receive sensitive information (e.g., grounds for mandated reporting) from a patient/client/consultee through technological communications?
Did I screen patients/clients/consultees for appropriateness with technology-based services (e.g., clinical, technological, language)?
Did I obtain documented informed consent with all patients/service recipients or their guardians at the outset of services?
Have I identified any particular risks related to interventions that have or have not been tested in a technology-based service delivery? Have I made these risks clear to the patients/clients/consultees so that they are able to make an informed decision about initiating or continuing with services?
Does my informed consent include information about my privacy, security, and data storage, transmission, and disposal policies?
Did I establish a fee schedule related to telecommunications-based services that specifies issues related to technology disruptions?
Was I knowledgeable about emergency, professional, and consultative local resources for the person I plan to serve remotely?
At the outset of a remote service, did I obtain a contact number for my client in case of technological failure or clinical emergency (Adams Larsen & Juntunen, 2018, p. 51)?
Confidentiality
Discovery of in-person service clinical notes or session content is only at risk for a court subpoena. Online content is publicly discoverable. Clients must be informed that total confidentiality cannot be assured; however, security measures, privacy settings, and other safeguards can be employed.
Risk Management Tip: A careful statement about the limitations of confidentiality should be developed and provided to clients at the start of treatment. The statement should inform clients of the standard limitations (e.g., child abuse reporting mandates), any state-specific requirements, and cautions about privacy problems with broadcast conversations.
The threats to confidentiality include therapist/client misdirection of content (e.g., e-mails, texts), technology failures, use of social media, and in-person viewing of electronic messages by others in the therapist or client space.
Risk Management Tip: Follow basic security protocols to ensure that sensitive patient data are never placed at unnecessary risk: Password protect the device, secure the devices when not in use, and limit use of devices to professional activities (Smucker Barnwell & Adams Larsen, 2018, p. 118).
No e-mail message is truly and irrevocably deleted. Psychologists should be aware that any content written can be retrievable without the psychologist’s permission. Psychologists who use social media for personal and not for professional purposes are still at risk given that those who have access to their platforms may pass photos and content along to someone else who in the thread of viewers may include a client. Inversely, psychologists are cautioned against using search engines to acquire information about clients without a prior explanation to the client of why the electronic access to client activity is necessary. What does a psychologist do with adverse information about a client that the client does not know the psychologist has? Psychologists who work with adolescents and young adults may be encouraged by clients to communicate through continually evolving social media platforms. A thorough risk/benefit assessment should be conducted and contractual agreements with clients should be recorded in the informed consent should these evolving technologies be utilized.
Security, Transmission, and Disposal of Data and Information (Recordkeeping)
For in-person services, psychologists are in possession of all client-related data kept in file cabinets until recently. Psychologists would need to get permission for records to be viewed or copied except for a court records’ subpoena. Online communication, videoconferencing, and electronic transmissions are all recorded by the clients as well as by the psychologists. Every word a psychologist says can be reproduced by the client and potentially by others. This would be the equivalent to clients videotaping clinical sessions and storing them at home. Psychologists may include in their informed consent, an agreement on how data are handled between the psychologist and client, and how the client treats and manages online information.
Unique threats to confidentiality in telecommunication include “computer viruses, hackers, theft of technology devices, damage to hard drives, or portable drives, failure of security systems, flawed software, ease of accessibility to unsecured electronic files, and malfunctioning or outdated technology” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 797). Psychologists acquire additional training and consultation in utilization encryption, robust passwords, and backup systems as essential means of securing confidential data.
Risk Management Tip: Seek frequent consultation from knowledgeable legal, computer and server IT, and malpractice experts (Smucker Barnwell & Adams Larsen, 2018, p. 118).
Electronic data are applicable to the APA Recordkeeping Guidelines (APA, 2007) in that types of data, length of retention, and treatment of data standards for in-person records should be met. Psychologists develop policies and procedures for disposal of records that ensure confidentiality. Cleaning data from hardware before reuse and monitoring the existence of malware, cookies, and other software should also be erased (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013).
Testing and Assessment
The major distinctions in assessment between in-person and online administration rest with two areas of practice: (a) appropriate procedural use of instruments consistent with the test manual instructions for administration and (b) lack of control of the remote environment. Test developers and publishers are vigorously engaged in modifying tests that were meant to be administered in person and in the development for online use. Psychologists are aware of the intended administrative procedures of all tests utilized and remain consistent with such. The soundness of the validity, reliability, and other psychometric properties is critical to the usefulness of test results and recommendations. Regardless of mode of administration, psychologists maintain the integrity of their testing procedures and resulting data by following the instructions of the manual. If a departure is required, psychologists will want to explain the why and how a departure was adopted. Fidelity to the test instructions and adherence to norms are critically important. In-person testing certainly requires attention to appropriateness of norms and other test characteristics in light of diversity factors such as language, culture, socioeconomic status (SES), age, and ethnicity as well as disabilities and impairments. Equally important are these factors in online testing. Psychologists will want to comment in their reports on the appropriateness of online testing if the norms of the online tests do not include the population being tested.
Risk Management Tip: Be deliberate in choosing and using technologies and hardware needed to conduct assessments. Be cognizant of factors that can arise regarding diverse populations (e.g., language, culture, impairments) and correct or accommodate and note those factors and their potential impact (Crow & Landry Poole, 2018, p. 138).
Consultation with those who have experience in telepsychology and assessment and in risk management is essential, as is continued education about how assessments and telepsychology impact each other, modifications that are recommended, and any new normative data.
A significant factor in online testing is lack of control of the remote site. Even with video capability, clients may have access to cell phones, the Internet, or other devices and thereby void the results of the assessment. Coaching, consultation, and other external sources of information could compromise the accuracy of scores. Relatedly, distractions that do not enhance performance, such as children being present or phones ringing, compromise the testing site. The most desirable solution to the remote site challenge is an onsite proctor. In actuality, testing and assessment are characterized by significant limitations at best and should be considered with great care. The APA Guidelines on Assessment and Evaluation, which include a section on technology, will be presented for a vote by APA Council in 2020 and will become another resource for maintaining standards of practice.
In summary, the ethical engagement in telepsychology is greatly enhanced by utilization of the resources described here. The extension of practice introduced by telepsychology presents a challenge to psychologists but also a significant expansion of access to client populations and fulfillment of needed services to those populations.
What Should I Do?

Psychologists should be thoughtful and strategic in deciding whether to use telecommunications technologies. The following are considerations when deciding to implement telepsychology with specific clients and their particular presenting problems:
Use of telepsychology services should be deemed at least as effective as face-to-face services and should be determined by evidence-based findings regarding client variables and application of the techniques or theoretical approaches employed.
Review available literature to support the use of telepsychology with each client’s specific diagnosis.
The psychologist should review current laws, state and national, as well as regulatory rules in order to ensure that the psychologist is engaged in appropriate and legal practice.
Make a determination of technology use primarily based upon appropriateness for the individual client.
Develop a plan for using telepsychology and technology with clients that outlines the rationale and process. Discuss the reason for introducing the telepsychology component with the client and obtain informed consent.
Discuss and address new issues of confidentiality and security that arise with the introduction of the telepsychology component in therapy, including securing the area where the patient will be during the telepsychology sessions.
Practice using the equipment and software to ensure the patient is comfortable and capable of engaging in telepsychology.
Conduct ongoing monitoring to ensure that telepsychology continues to meet the intended therapeutic purpose.
Technology competence should be assured both for the psychologist and the client. When evaluating the progress of a client, the psychologist should also evaluate the use of technology.
Join or create an ongoing, standing group of other psychologists who use technology in their work to provide continual consultation and support.
Conduct periodic assessment of the clinical utility of the technology being used to determine whether to continue its use.
Psychologists who decide to incorporate telepsychology into their practices will be able to answer these questions confidently and completely:
How much do I know about the clinical research/professional literature, including guidelines, on using telepsychology? Are there better, more secure, or more effective alternatives?
How much do I know about the legal or regulatory policies in my state governing telehealth?
How much do I know about the technology that I want to use in my practice? Specifically, what are the benefits and what are the risks?
How will I monitor and ensure appropriateness of treatment, technological competence, confidentiality and security, knowledge of emergency resources, and continued learning?
How will I identify and manage risk?
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act/Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
In addition to state and jurisdictional requirements, psychologists must ensure compliance with federal requirements. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Privacy & Security Rule requirements extend to all the clients’ data. These rules govern what disclosures of patient health information are permitted and provide policies governing electronic patient health information—secure transmission, transmission quality, audit trails, and breach notification policies. Psychologists need a business associate agreement with any third party that may have access to patients’ data (e.g., accountant, billing service, practice management software, answering service, cloud storage).
Risk Management Tip: Thoroughly review and consult to learn what you do not know, what you need to know, and what you need to access, and then develop a plan of action before disposing of data and devices.
They also need policies and procedures in place to securely store, transfer, and dispose of patient data and should use HIPAA-compliant vendors and encryption, when possible (Campbell, Baker, Martin, & Millán, 2018).
Hardware Disposal Plan
Delete all files from the laptop computer.
Reformat computer hard drive and USB drives.
Complete “factory reset” or “hard reset” for mobile device and tablet.
Ensure that no patient information remains on encrypted external storage devices (e.g., USB flash drives) by deleting files and reformatting the drive.
Recycle hardware with a local technology recycling company or with a vendor offering a rebate.
Software Removal/Disposal Plan
Delete all contacts and call history from text, e-mail, and videoconferencing programs.
Uninstall software/mobile applications from all hardware.
Log in to any web-based interfaces (e.g., e-mail program, web management for secure text account) to delete any stored information (e.g., stored patient information, call logs of prior clinical contacts).
Contact the vendors for web-based services to inquire how to ensure that all deleted information was permanently deleted from any future access (Smucker Barnwell & Adams Larsen, 2018, p. 105).
Staying Informed/Staying Current

Psychologists are very familiar with their responsibility to be competent as professionals, and when practicing telepsychology, technical competence is added to intellectual and emotional competence. Keeping one’s knowledge base up-to-date is a critical component of being competent and is good risk management.
Risk Management Tip: Seek appropriate consultation.
State, regional, and national professional associations are good places to look for paid and peer consultation. Psychologists are encouraged to identify those who have experience with telepsychology in diverse settings and with diverse populations. They should remember to include professional groups that focus on telemetry and consult with their professional liability provider for risk management guidance, workshops, and other resources.
The ever-changing world of technology and of the standard of care for using telepsychology in therapy and assessment requires vigilance on the part of the practitioner. While certain elements may remain underlying principles for the practice of telepsychology, many elements will also change because of the rapid advances in technology and evolving legal and regulatory requirements (Campbell, Millán, et al., 2018). Because of these changes, the best guidance for psychologists to stay current and engage in the competent practice of telepsychology is to identify seminal documents and informational sources, as well as to encourage continuing education and consultation with risk management experts and those engaged in the ethical practice of telepsychology and its further development.
Risk Management Tip: Have a good working knowledge of the Ethics Code, the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, and legal standards governing practice.
At the heart of critical sources of information are the following:
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013), https://www.apa.org/practice/guidelines/telepsychology: These aspirational guidelines are designed to facilitate the practice of telepsychology and to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, and competence of those who practice. The Guidelines include Competence of the Psychologist, Standards of Care in the Delivery of Telepsychology Services, Informed Consent, Confidentiality of Data and Information, Security and Transmission of Data and Information, Disposal of Data and Information and Technologies, Testing and Assessment, and Interjurisdictional Practice.
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (APA, 2017), https://www.apa.org/ethics/code/ethics-code-2017.pdf: The Ethics Code identifies standards and rules of conduct that apply to psychologists in their professional roles. As stated in the introduction to the code, “Although the Preamble and General Principles are not themselves enforceable rules, they should be considered by psychologists in arriving at an ethical course of action. The Ethical Standards set forth enforceable rules for conduct as psychologists.”
State regulations and guidelines: The practice of psychology is regulated by each state, which sets forth requirements for licensure. Requirements vary from state to state, so it is critically important to be familiar with individual state regulations, especially temporary or guest practice provisions. Many states have also developed specific telepsychology statutes/regulations. Consult the Business and Professions Code of your state laws and the states in which you wish to practice to ensure you are aware of laws governing practice. While there are many sites that present compilations of state licensing laws, it is the responsibility of each psychologist to verify information by consulting state laws directly. Remember, too, that laws change, so frequent review of state regulations is strongly suggested.
ASPPB, https://www.asppb.net: With its mission “To support member jurisdictions in fulfilling their responsibility of public protection” and a vision of “Consistent standards that ensure the competent practice of psychology,” ASPPB created PSYPACT, an interstate compact, “to facilitate telehealth and temporary in-person, face-to-face practice of psychology across jurisdictional boundaries.” ASPPB provides important and updated information on PSYPACT legislation, rules, and implementation in addition to a database of current licensing requirements through its PSY/Book, formerly known as the ASPPB Handbook on Licensing and Certification Requirements (https://www.asppb.net/page/psybook).
The Trust (https://www.trustinsurance.com): The Trust remains a leading provider of insurance and risk management programs for psychologists, psychology students, and related individuals in the United States. The Trust participated in the task force that developed the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013). In addition, the workshops and consultation that The Trust offers through its risk management program provide psychologists with important guidance to help them reduce their risk in the area of telepsychology.
Another valuable resource is the American Telemedicine Association (https://www.americantelemed.org), which provides training materials and opportunities, discussion forums, updates in the field of telehealth, and information on current telehealth initiatives.
There are many additional resources to consult. Check with your state as well as national psychological associations for webinars, legislative updates, and colleagues who may be knowledgeable about telepsychology. Also helpful is an independent telemental health technology comparison site (https://telementalhealthcomparisons.com/), which includes a comparison of software for practitioners and other resources. Finally, consulting with an attorney who works with mental health professionals engaged in telemedicine practice and who is familiar with telepsychology practice and regulations can be immensely helpful.
Conclusion

Technology transforms daily living in ways not imaginable even a few years ago. The practice of psychology is equally impacted, resulting in early career and senior psychologists alike needing guidance. Students and early career psychologists are learning to apply standards of practice to their familiarity with technology, and psychologists who are not technology savvy are learning to apply technology to their expertise in traditional practice. That is, there is room for all to learn and adapt. This article has walked the reader through the primary phases of telepsychology practice. A new modality of practice can be daunting, particularly one such as telepsychology, which requires a reorienting of the way psychologists think about standards of care and how they conduct their practices. Psychologists who are considering telepsychology typically want to know the following: What are the benefits and barriers? What do I need to know? How can I ensure that I am practicing within my scope and within the boundaries of ethical and legal practice? What should I do to proceed? These and other questions are answered here as well as risk management tips offered, which give guidance to psychologists in their decision-making process. Psychologist practitioners are on the leading edge in advancing services to clients/patients in the burgeoning settings in which they practice and in expanding scope of practice. Psychologists have choices of the degree, depth, type, and form in which they participate in telepsychology. This article is intended to assist in making these choices.",
"15": "Chronic lower respiratory disease (CLRD) is a group of health conditions characterized by airflow blockage and breathing-related problems (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2020a; World Health Organization [WHO], 2020a). CLRD encompasses three major diseases: asthma, chronic bronchitis, and emphysema. The airway obstruction in emphysema and chronic bronchitis is irreversible. And these diseases are commonly classified together as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) according to the American Lung Association (2020a). An estimated 16 million persons in the United States, Aged 18 and older, suffer from CLRD with nearly 50 million undiagnosed individuals showing evidence of impaired lung functioning (Wheaton, Cunningham, Ford, Croft, & the CDC, 2015). CLRD is the 4th leading cause of death in the United States with COPD accounting for the majority of these deaths (CDC, 2020a).
Persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers often have difficulty accessing clinical services. For example, there are twice as many persons with CLRD residing in rural versus urban areas in the United States (Croft et al., 2018). Also, risk factors for developing CLRD such as smoking, exposure to secondhand smoke, and industrial pathogens tend to be more prevalent in some rural versus urban areas (Matthews et al., 2017).
The novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic further complicates issues of access to services for persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers. This new strain of coronavirus primarily attacks the respiratory system and is more contagious than other flu-like infectious diseases (CDC, 2020b; WHO, 2020b). Persons with CLRD are at higher risk of developing serious complications if they contract COVID-19 such as pneumonia, the need for a ventilator, and subsequent death (CDC, 2020b; Huang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020).
The objective of this article is to provide clinicians from multiple disciplines with important clinical information to consider when providing health education and emotional support to persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers via telehealth. The information contained in this article is based on a literature review and a needs/preferences survey of this population (n = 49 persons with CLRD; n = 49 informal caregivers). The needs/preferences survey was undertaken to help shape telehealth services for this population particularly those residing in rural/geographically isolated areas as well as those who are not physically well enough to attend clinic-based appointments.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the use of telehealth services for clinical care has dramatically risen for a variety of reasons. We surmise that persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers are particularly open to telehealth services given the risk of exposure to the virus upon leaving their homes. As such, we provide information about the physical and psychosocial aspects of living with CLRD from the perspective of patients and their informal caregivers. We also provide specific recommendations for the provision of telehealth services for this population.
Overview of Physical Health Aspects of Living With CLRD

When working with any population with a health condition, clinicians need to know the basics about how physical health is impacted by that condition. CLRD is a serious progressive health condition affecting the respiratory system (CDC, 2020a). Persons living with CRLD suffer from daily, unremitting dyspnea and symptoms such as breathlessness, a chronic cough, frequent respiratory infections, fatigue, activity intolerance, labored breathing, and chest tightness. These symptoms may last for years with progressive loss of physical exertional capacity which compromises the ability to participate in activities of daily living and pleasurable activities. Furthermore, comorbid conditions such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and renal disease are prevalent in persons with CLRD (Krishnan et al., 2019).
Acute CLRD exacerbations and episodic worsening of symptoms requiring emergent medical attention are common and accounts for more than 50% of the overall cost of managing the condition (Criner et al., 2015), has consistently been associated with increased morbidity and mortality (Oelsner et al., 2016), and is correlated with advancing disease (Vestbo et al., 2011). In those with advanced CLRD, specific adverse health-related outcomes include pronounced disability, poorer health-related quality of life, the development of other comorbid conditions, and higher rates of hospitalizations and death (CDC, 2020a; Waschki et al., 2015).
Overview of the Psychosocial Aspects of Living With CLRD

Persons with CLRD experience episodes of breathlessness even when their condition is stable. In times of acute exacerbation, these episodes can be life threatening resulting in respiratory failure and even death. Episodes of breathlessness, particularly acute exacerbations, tend to be frightening for both persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers leading to emotional responses such as fear and panic. Additionally, persons with CLRD may develop symptoms of depression and anxiety (Smith & Wrobel, 2014). Likewise, informal caregivers may also develop symptoms of depression, anxiety, and panic that mirror that of their loved ones (Cafarella, Effing, Usmani, & Frith, 2012; Nicholson, 2015; Pimple et al., 2019).
The degree to which persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers experience social connection, loneliness, and isolation are important to consider in clinical practice. Social isolation and loneliness are both forms of social connection with shared, as well as unique, definitions and potential effects on the well-being of persons living with CLRD and their informal caregivers. Social connection is a complex concept that includes structural, functional, and quality dimensions of the relationship between a person and their social support system(s). The structural dimension of social connection includes the inventory of social relationships such as availability, duration, and size. The functional dimension of social connection includes exchanges of help and social support. The quality dimension of social connection includes the degree of satisfaction and/or shared affection (Holt-Lunstad, 2017). Breathlessness limits social interaction (Wong et al., 2014) and may decrease an individual’s sense of belonging and connection with others.
In contrast to social connectedness, loneliness is the subjective perception that one’s expectations of relationships are unfulfilled, generating a psychological state of dissatisfaction (Heinrich & Gullone, 2006; Perlman & Peplan, 1981). Kara and Mirici (2004) and Petitte et al. (2015) document the extent to which loneliness is a major physical and mental health detriment to persons coping with CLRD. Loneliness can lead to severe emotional reactions such as feelings of depression and anxiety that exacerbate respiratory symptoms, which, in turn, increases the likelihood of loneliness (Smith & Wrobel, 2014; Wang, Mann, Lloyd-Evans, Ma, & Johnson, 2018; & Cacioppo, Grippo, London, Goossens, & Cacioppo, 2015). Limited mobility may also contribute to the experience of loneliness (Cacioppo et al., 2015).
Persons living with CLRD, who experience social isolation, have a 26% higher mortality rate than their socially connected counterparts and tend to engage in health care resources more frequently (Gerst-Emerson & Jayawardhana, 2015; Holt-Lunstad, Smith, Baker, Harris, & Stephenson, 2015). Social isolation has been associated with a reduced capacity to perform activities of daily living (Shankar, McMunn, Demakakos, Hamer, & Steptoe, 2017), depression (Cohen & Wills, 1985), a compromised immune system (Holt-Lunstad, Smith, & Layton, 2010), cardiovascular disease (Case, Moss, Case, McDermott, & Eberly, 1992), and mortality (Sugisawa, Liang, & Liu, 1994).
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, clinicians should consider that while social distancing measures may mediate exponential contagion in a population, they may also have the unintended effect of exacerbating social isolation and loneliness, key social determinants of health among persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers. The ramifications are that they may not be able to participate in valued activities outside of the home. Furthermore, if persons with CLRD or their formal caregivers develop COVID-19, they will also need to be distanced from each other in the home setting potentially increasing the likelihood of loneliness.
Overview of the Informal Caregiver Experience

Informal caregivers of persons with CLRD often provide care for their loved ones at home on their own given the debilitating nature of CLRD and the cost of home health care (Nakken et al., 2015). This level of care may negatively impact informal caregivers on multiple levels such as health, emotional well-being, social relationships, and financial/employment status (Cruz, Marques, & Figueiredo, 2017; Fernández et al., 2019).
For example, the physical aspects of caregiving for a person with CLRD requires perpetual alertness, potentially adding another layer to a perception of burden (Costa Tadeo, Pla Consuegra, & Gomez Batiste-Alentorn, 2015). When a person living with CLRD has an acute crises requiring health care interventions or hospitalization, informal caregivers may experience anticipatory grief which adds to their emotional distress (Costa Tadeo et al., 2015). These experiences may have a negative impact on the level of care given to the persons with CLRD (Fernández et al., 2019). In addition, it places the informal caregiver at risk of developing emotional difficulties such as depression and loneliness that runs parallel to the patient’s experience (Costa Tadeo et al., 2015; Cruz et al., 2017; Gardiner et al., 2010).
Importantly, the literature suggests that informal caregivers who do not have adequate health education about the various aspects of living with CLRD may not provide care for their loved one to the degree that they would if they had received health education (Hsiao, Chu, Sung, Perng, & Wang, 2014; Jaureguizar Oriol, Galarza Jiménez, Mayoralas Alises, Díaz Lobato, & Gómez García, 2016). There is evidence that most clinical interventions for this population do not have an educational component despite the potentially positive impact on care (Andersen, Thomsen, Bruun, Bødtger, & Hounsgaard, 2018).
Overview of Telehealth Services

Telehealth is a broad term to describe the use of technology to remotely provide health care services and can be used by clinicians from various disciplines to assist persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers (Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, 2017). Telepsychology, a mental health provider specific form of telehealth services, has been defined as “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 791). Clinicians who use the telephone or mobile devices are engaging in the practice of telehealth and telepsychology. Recent technological advances have expanded the practice of telehealth to include videoconferencing, e-mail, chat, text, and mobile apps, as well as online platforms such as websites, health portals, and social media. Telehealth services may be used to supplement in-person therapy sessions or as a primary method of providing services (Martin, Millán, & Campbell, 2020).
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, telehealth offers opportunities for care when in-person services are not feasible. It can be delivered independent of location and physical access, which, in turn, has great potential benefit to CLRD patients and caregivers in the midst of a pandemic. First, utilizing this form of service over in-person visits protects the patient from a possible exposure to COVID-19, which not only has physiological but also psychological benefits for the patient. It is an avenue for receiving necessary care without the fear and anxiety of being exposed to a health risk through contact with other individuals. Second, telehealth provides an opportunity for CLRD patients and caregivers that are isolated from their support network to engage with clinicians. If they are experiencing depression, anxiety, or other symptoms and physical access to services is not feasible, it offers a viable alternative to receiving treatment. Lastly, this modality of clinical service can be provided across any distance, opening up access to practitioners with specific expertise. Those with special needs can receive treatment from practitioners or multidisciplinary teams of practitioners that are competent in their specific concerns (Martin et al., 2020).
It is a priority for clinicians to stay up to date on local, state, and national telehealth regulations and guidelines. Although telehealth services can reach populations across state lines, it important to be aware that each state has its own set of laws and regulations about how out of state practitioners can treat residents. Also important to consider are standards for ethical practice related to a clinician’s license.
Treatment Needs, Preferences, and Barriers for Telehealth Services

The Enhancing Rural Interventions for Caregiver Health (En-Rich) project examined the needs, preferences, and barriers to telehealth services in persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers. Forty-nine patient/informal caregiver dyads were invited to complete a brief survey (approximately 15 min) after their regularly scheduled home-based primary care clinic appointment. Inclusion criteria for participating in the survey were moderate to severe disease, informal caregiver living at home, difficulty coming to clinic-based appointments, and/or residing in a rural/geographically isolated area. A diagnosis of dementia, limited proficiency in the English language, and lack of access to a telephone were exclusion criteria.
Persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers were given the survey separately. They were asked if they would benefit from telehealth services which could potentially provide an additional layer of health education and emotional support in addition to what they were already receiving during their regularly scheduled clinic appointments, what their needs/treatment preferences were for the structure and content of these services, and what they perceived as barriers for participating. Private health information was not collected as part of the survey.
The majority of participants were men (93.9%), who, on average, were 70.6 years old, while the majority of informal caregivers were women (92%), who, on average, were 63.8 years old. Participants were asked open-ended questions about which health education topics would be most valued. They reported that they would like to receive: (a) additional information about CLRD (e.g., diagnosis, prognosis, treatment) above and beyond what they were provided during their regularly scheduled appointments, (b) strategies for responding to a medical crisis, (c) stress reduction and relaxation strategies, and (d) ways to manage relationships and communication in the context of coping with CLRD. Other health education topics of interest were smoking cessation, reducing air pollutants, increasing physical activity, improving nutrition, enhancing sleep, and planning for the future.
The majority of participants indicated that they would prefer to receive telehealth services via telephone (rather than Internet based or video conferencing modalities). They reported that sessions should be 30 min or less (with a large proportion of those surveyed preferring 15 min or less), weekly or biweekly in frequency, and five sessions or less total. They were open to receiving these services from a variety of clinicians such as licensed counselors, nurses, psychologists, and social workers. The most frequently endorsed barrier to participation was not having enough time, followed by preferring to keep their situation private, not being healthy enough to participate, believing that it would not help, being embarrassed about their condition, wanting to keep their situation private, and believing that they were managing fine without additional assistance. The En-Rich project culminated in the development of a cognitive-behaviorally oriented telehealth intervention for persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers. The En-Rich intervention includes a 5 session manual for interventionists as well as patients and families (McGee, Sorocco, & Bensadon, 2018). For more information, contact first author.
Implications and Recommendations

Of note, our research was not focused specifically on persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers who currently have the COVID-19 virus. However, we believe that the implications and recommendations we provide are particularly relevant at this time given the shift toward telehealth services in the United States. Persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers are an underserved population who are considered high risk for developing COVID-19 and may benefit from telehealth support during the pandemic and into the future. Implications and recommendations follow:
Evaluate Readiness for Patient Centered Care and Health Education
Best practices for telehealth services include delivering patient-centered care and health education (Marcus, 2014). Implementing this highly individualized standard of care requires attention to the learning needs, characteristics of the learner, and the nature of familial support.
Assess persons with CLRD and/or their informal caregiver for readiness to learn and level of health literacy. There is evidence of low health literacy among persons living with CRLD (Puente-Maestu et al., 2016). Therefore, clinician-supported interpretation and discussion of health-related information may be a necessary form of support when working with this population.
Assess level of comprehension of the health care information and identify what stressors or barriers affect the learning process (Marcus, 2014).
Account for cultural and religious beliefs, emotional barriers, desire and motivation to learn, cognitive and physical limitations, and barriers to communication (Marcus, 2014).
Ascertain relational dynamics within the persons with CLRD’s family including the relationship with their informal caregiver, what support systems are in place, and how their environment impacts their care and learning needs (Marcus, 2014).
Practice Flexibility in Delivery
Applying telehealth delivery platforms to support persons with CRLD and their informal caregivers, particularly during a pandemic, requires flexibility and creativity. Clinicians should take the following into consideration:
Consider whether or not your client has access to and comfort with various forms of telehealth technology. Preferences may vary considerably between clients and even between persons who are residing in the same household. Some persons with CRLD may be older and live in a rural area which may make it difficult to access wi-fi or even cellular services. There is evidence a simple call on a telephone is a preference for this population.
Plan ahead and determine the client’s technology needs before a session is scheduled. For example, if your client does not have e-mail, teaching materials may need to be mailed ahead of the scheduled visit.
Establish contingency arrangements for times when telehealth technology is not functioning properly. There are numerous methods of utilizing technology to present health information, but it will decrease stress if a plan is developed ahead of time for technological difficulties.
Maintain privacy and confidentiality during telehealth visits. It is up to the person with CLRD and their informal caregiver as to who they want present during the session. However, it is the clinician’s responsibility to discuss questions about privacy and confidentiality. The recipient should also be informed if other people, such as office staff, are in the room with the telehealth clinician during the session.
Be prepared for other family members, friends, or pets to interrupt the session. If needed, be willing to reschedule the session for a different time. It helps to coach persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers on how to tactfully ask others to leave the room for the sake of privacy.
Consider the Impact of Physical Symptoms
Physical symptoms of CLRD may be a barrier to communication during a telehealth session. Providing anticipated and unanticipated accommodations are key competencies of the telehealth professional. For example, speech may be fragmented due to the effort of breathing and frequent coughing.
Understand the impact of breathing assistance devices on the flow of the telehealth interaction. Most persons with moderate to severe symptoms of CLRD will have home supplemental oxygen or other noninvasive mechanical ventilation devices. These devices are life-saving modalities for augmenting the volume of oxygen going into the lungs. The telehealth visit will need to accommodate the noise of breathing devices and presence of a mask or tubing on the patient’s face.
Accommodate for the effects on anoxia. The extra effort of breathing and the trouble getting oxygen can result in fatigue and loss of concentration for persons with CLRD. To overcome this barrier, the telehealth clinician should ask questions that can be answered with minimal effort. Plan short, meaningful visits that deliver information in small increments. Visual and written tools can reinforce teaching after the visit (Marcus, 2014).
Determine optimal time for telehealth interactions. For telehealth services to be most effective, visits should be scheduled for a time when the patient is rested and feeling relatively well or stable. Informal caregivers may be more open to having sessions when their loved one is sleeping if they need a one-on-one session versus a family session.
Expect unplanned changes in telehealth appointments. The health and stamina of persons with CLRD is unpredictable. The clinician should consider having a backup plan in case a telehealth visit needs to be canceled at the last minute or a visit is cut short.
Develop an Action Plan for Responding to an Acute Exacerbation of Respiratory Symptoms
Persons with CLRD tend to experience an acute exacerbation of their respiratory symptoms requiring immediate medical attention at least once a year (Seemungal, Hurst, & Wedzicha, 2009). The En-Rich needs and preferences survey suggested that people with CLRD and their informal caregivers desire assistance in developing an action plan for what to do in the case of an acute exacerbation.
Help patients recognize and react appropriately to acute exacerbations. An action plan is a self-management strategy designed to help persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers plan in advance of a crisis (Jalota & Jain, 2016). The American Lung Association (2020b) recommends that the action plan address how and when to take medicines, when to call health care providers, and when to get emergency care. An action plan should also guide patients to recognize and track concerning respiratory-related symptoms.
Individualize planning and insure a multidisciplinary approach. The strategy is more likely to be effective when the plan is unique to the person and to the informal caregiving relationship. (Jalota & Jain, 2016). An example COPD acute exacerbation action plan can be located through the American Lung Association website (www.lung.org).
Calibrate plan for COVID-19. Respiratory-compromised patients and their families may be faced with more challenges when it comes to managing their illness in the middle of this pandemic. Practitioners should guide patients and their families to create a plan for responding to a medical crisis. In addition to an individualized plan, the American Lung Association (www.lung.org) and the American Heart Association (www.heart.org) have recommended action plans that give clear instructions for patients and caregivers to follow should any new signs or symptoms develop.
Assess Level of Social Isolation and Loneliness
As documented in the paper, persons living with CLRD and their informal caregivers who experience social isolation and/or loneliness are at high risk in the context of COVID-19 for a significant spectrum of health and emotional issues, many of which impact relationships and communication between patients and families or caregivers. Understanding the extent of perceived social connection is an important step in responsive and individualized telehealth care.
We suggest a couple of brief assessment tools aimed at helping clinicians ascertain the nature and extent of social isolation and/or loneliness. These resources are intended as guides as the professional conducts the assessment interview. While these tools are framed as survey items with quantifiable responses, the intention is to suggest stimulus questions that will provide a nuanced view of the person’s social connections and possibly alert the clinician to interventions aimed at addressing the potential risks of isolation and loneliness.
A short scale for measuring loneliness in large surveys. Hughes, Waite, Hawkley, and Cacioppo (2004) developed this brief measure (available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18504506/). The three-item tool facilitates the telepsychology professional’s ability to inquire about the extent to which respondents feel a lack of companionship, left out, and isolated.
Social connection screening tool.
The authors adapted a seven-item screening tool based on Bengtson and Roberts’ (1991) seminal work on the dimensions of intergenerational relationships. This screening tool is designed to elicit information on social connectedness, social isolation, and loneliness and is available to clinicians by request.
Offer Stress Reduction and Relaxation Strategies
Persons with CLRD and their family caregivers expressed a need to learn stress reduction and relaxation strategies per the En-Rich preferences/needs assessment survey. There is evidence that nonpharmaceutical methods too can be effectively utilized to alleviate respiratory distress (Similowski, 2018). While there is a wide array of these techniques available, telehealth clinicians should give consideration to application of these modalities.
“Thinking of a nice place.” In one study of this population, the most commonly preferred technique, for both effectiveness and ease of use this technique followed by progressive muscle relaxation and counting (Hyland et al., 2016).
Mindfulness-based cognitive–behavioral therapy. Clinical studies report the efficacy of this therapeutic intervention with respiratory patients, associated with significantly decrease levels of anxiety and depression (Farver-Vestergaard et al., 2018). Psychological disorders, especially depression, correlate with worsened respiratory suffering in patients (Morélot-Panzini et al., 2016). While mindfulness-based therapy doesn’t reduce respiratory symptoms directly, research shows that it can impact symptoms indirectly through the brain’s affective pathways.
Relaxation techniques. Reducing anxiety through relaxation techniques may offset this spiral of events possibly resulting in fewer calls to the emergency room and decreased hospitalizations (Halpin et al., 2015). There is evidence that regular practice of relaxation techniques among persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers can reduce overall stress as well as anxiety during times of breathlessness (Gift, Moore, & Soeken, 1992). Guided imagery (Louie, 2004), progressive muscle relaxation (Renfroe, 1988), listening to soothing music (Singh, Rao, Prem, Sahoo, & Keshav, 2009), and mindfulness meditation (Benzo, 2011; Chan, Giardino, & Larson, 2015; Harrison, Lee, Janaudis-Ferreira, Goldstein, & Brooks, 2016; Mularski et al., 2009) are all promising techniques. Overall, persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers should be exposed to a range of relaxation and stress reduction techniques that takes into consideration their preferences for maximal efficacy.
Know Your Scope of Practice
This article has been written for clinicians from multiple disciplines who may provide telehealth services to persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers. Although our recommendations and observations are relevant for clinical practice with this population, we advise clinicians to be aware of discipline-specific legal ramifications of practice, ethical guidelines, and the parameters of their licensing boards on the practice of telehealth.
Conclusions

Persons with CLRD and their informal caregivers are an underserved population who are considered high risk for developing COVID-19 and may benefit from telehealth support during the pandemic and into the future. Based on our research, 7 clinical implications and recommendations were provided for the practice of telehealth with this population: (a) provide patient centered care and health education, (b) practice flexibility in delivery, (c) consider the impact of physical symptoms, (d) conduct a psychosocial assessment, (e) offer stress reduction and relaxation strategies, (f) provide resources for developing an action plan for responding to an acute exacerbation of respiratory symptoms, and (g) know your scope of practice.
",
"16": "The global outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) has created a significant set of challenges for the delivery of mental health care. The level of psychological distress across populations, which includes acute stress reactions and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), will increase dramatically as large numbers of people experience persistent fear; illness; social isolation; economic stress; resource loss; or the death of a family member, friend, or patient. At a time of increased need for psychological support, risk of contagion can make it dangerous for psychotherapists to provide conventional in-person treatment. Our mental health workforce has been forced to rapidly adapt by using teleconferencing, telephone, and other telehealth modalities to deliver psychological care. Telepsychotherapy (i.e., conducting psychotherapy from a distance by video link or telephone), once considered an optional or peripheral practice, has become central to delivering care during this pandemic.
Considering this global pandemic, clinicians will need to be flexible in how they deliver services, integrating knowledge from telepsychotherapy, PTSD treatment research, and disaster mental health to inform how they address their patients’ needs during and after the pandemic. There are a number of evidence-based treatments (EBTs) for PTSD, and a growing body of clinical research supports the efficacy of these interventions when delivered via telepsychotherapy. Clinicians can also draw on the disaster mental health literature to inform their response to COVID-19. In this article, we draw on these literatures to discuss how mental health professionals can use telepsychotherapy to address two challenges: (1) providing support to help distressed people cope during a period of high stress and social isolation, especially for medical personnel and other individuals with high exposure to pandemic-related illness and death and (2) remotely treating people who have developed significant posttraumatic stress symptoms.
The goal of this article is to integrate findings from these literatures to inform psychotherapists’ provision of telepsychotherapy during the current pandemic. This is not a formal systematic review or a scoping review; rather, it is a synthesis of findings from prior reviews. To outline the mental health effects of disasters in general and of pandemics in particular, we searched PubMed and the PTSDpubs Database, which comprises psychological trauma research (https://www.ptsd.va.gov/ptsdpubs/search_ptsdpubs.asp), for review articles on “mental health OR PTSD and disaster” and for primary articles on “mental health OR PTSD and pandemic.” Our discussion of telepsychotherapy is informed by several recent reviews of that research (e.g., Fletcher et al., 2018; Morland et al., 2017; Norwood, Moghaddam, Malins, & Sabin-Farrell, 2018). We also draw upon a recent review by the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies’ (2019) of randomized controlled trials testing early interventions after trauma. However, few randomized trials have been conducted after disasters. As a result, we also searched articles in PubMed and the PTSDpubs Database on “mental health OR PTSD and disaster and intervention” and reviewed materials for two of the most widely used approaches in disaster response, psychological first aid (PFA; Vernberg et al., 2008) and skills for psychological recovery (SPR; Berkowitz et al., 2010).
Pandemic as a Traumatic Stressor

The COVID-19 pandemic is a modern disaster; it is a global event that involves threat of harm or death to large numbers of people, causes loss of resources and disruption of services and social networks, and is likely to have lasting physical health impacts, mental health impacts, or both (Goldmann & Galea, 2014). Many people experience the anxiety, depression, stress, or insomnia in the first few months after disaster and, in many cases, these symptoms resolve over time (Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson, 1995; Norris et al., 2002). However, a small subset of the population will go on to experience chronic problems stemming from their disaster experience. These long-term issues can include PTSD, depression, anxiety disorders, or complicated grief and can persist for years after the event (Adams et al., 2006; Kristensen, Weisaeth, & Heir, 2010). An individual’s risk for developing chronic mental health problems is impacted by several pre- and postdisaster factors. Predisaster risk factors for developing PTSD include prior psychiatric disorders, lower socioeconomic status, and female gender (Adams & Boscarino, 2006; Foa, Stein, & McFarlane, 2006). Acute distress and risk of PTSD are also higher among individuals who experienced greater direct threat or higher resource losses during the disaster itself. Postdisasters factors, such as limited social support and concurrent stressors (e.g., financial stress), further add to an individual’s risk of developing PTSD or other chronic disorders (Goldmann & Galea, 2014; Sayed, Iacoviello, & Charney, 2015). Therefore, we expect that the current social disruption and economic losses of the current pandemic will add to the mental health impact of COVID-19.
The few studies conducted on PTSD prevalence during the COVID-19 pandemic are consistent with this broader literature on the mental health effects of disasters. A survey of the Chinese population in late January/early February 2020, as COVID-19 was first taking hold, found that 75% of respondents reported significant levels of posttraumatic stress symptoms, with most in the moderate to severe range (Wang et al., 2020). Widespread distress is common during the initial acute phase of a disaster, when fear and uncertainty are at their height (Norris et al., 2002). Yet, for many people, stress reactions abate over time as the disaster resolves and people resume normal routines. Four months after the final severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) case was reported in Taiwan, the prevalence of psychiatric disorders was only 11% (Peng et al., 2010). However, individuals with the highest levels of trauma exposure are at greater risk of developing chronic symptoms. Among hospital staff surveyed 3 years after a SARS outbreak, PTSD prevalence was two to three times higher among staff members who worked in units with high SARS exposure, who had been quarantined, or who had close friends or relatives fall ill (Wu et al., 2009). In one hospital, about half (48%) of the patients who survived a SARS infection met diagnostic criteria for PTSD at some point following their infection, and one quarter (26%) still had PTSD 30 months after the outbreak resolved (Mak et al., 2010).
The COVID-19 pandemic is a unique stressor, and several aspects of this outbreak may contribute to higher rates of chronic PTSD in its aftermath. Individuals who are asymptomatic can transmit COVID-19. Human coronaviruses can live on surfaces for up to 9 days (Kamp, Todt, Pfaender, & Steinmann, 2020). As a result, it is difficult for individuals to adequately determine whether situations or objects (e.g., delivered packages) are safe or dangerous. This leads to a pervasive sense of threat. Everyday events, like getting groceries, may now feel threatening and confusing. Further, in 2020, a significant portion of the population has unlimited access to a 24-hr news media cycle. This unprecedented exposure to real time information and insider access to the “front lines” (e.g., interviews with doctors, bereaved loved ones) may also serve to exacerbate anxiety, depression, and other mental health problems. Personnel, ranging from front line medical staff to administrative and janitorial staff who are onsite daily, lack appropriate personal protective equipment. These essential workers may be risking exposure to the virus—and their own lives—by showing up for work. People who lose family members or friends during the pandemic may experience traumatic grief or PTSD as a result of their loss (Vetter, Kaiser, Schibler, Ciglenecki, & Bausch, 2016), especially if they feel guilty for unknowingly transmitting the disease to others or not being able to save the person who died. We do not yet know what effect extended periods of physical distancing will have on perceived social support, which is one of the most important protective factors against developing PTSD (Sayed et al., 2015). The economic effects of the pandemic will add to resource loss, cumulative stress, and uncertainty, further increasing risk for PTSD. The likely traumatic effects of the global COVID-19 pandemic will require aggressive and innovative changes as mental health care systems across the world adapt to using technology to deliver care.
Role of Telepsychotherapy During a Pandemic

Telepsychotherapy technologies were originally developed to overcome geographic- and time-related barriers to care. Traditional face-to-face EBTs for PTSD require that patients travel to a clinic, often during the workday or at times when they have other responsibilities. Enabling patients to complete some of their treatment from home reduces travel time and may make scheduling easier. Providing care via telepsychotherapy can also be more private, reducing stigma concerns. Fear of having others see them in a psychotherapist’s office can be a barrier to help-seeking, especially for people in professions such as law enforcement, fire service, and the military that prize strength and self-reliance (Haugen, McCrillis, Smid, & Nijdam, 2017). Some features of PTSD may also be barriers to trauma survivors accessing treatment. Individuals who have trauma-related fears of driving, fears of crowded public transportation, or trauma-related cues in the clinical care setting (e.g., fear of contagion in medical settings) may find it easier to get treatment while remaining in their own home.
Until recently, telepsychotherapy has largely been viewed as an optional supplement to conventional face-to-face care. This has changed dramatically with the onset of COVID-19; telepsychotherapy is now an essential tool for delivering mental health care. Telepsychotherapy allows for the provision of care while sheltering in place (i.e., when large segments of the population are asked to stay at home). Telepsychotherapy also enables patients and providers to continue participating in treatment if one or both are under quarantine or in isolation after being exposed to, or diagnosed with, COVID-19. Telepsychotherapy can also be used to facilitate coverage for clinicians who fall ill during the pandemic or to provide extra support to COVID-19 “hot spots.” Healthy psychotherapists from an area with a lower incidence of COVID-19 can remotely deliver care to another community with increased need due to greater rates of COVID-19 infections. Telepsychotherapy enables psychotherapists to continue to provide care while they––and their clients––remain safely at home.
Patient Process, Comfort, and Preference in Clinical Video Teleconferencing

The most widely studied telepsychotherapy modality is clinical video teleconferencing (CVT), which allows a psychotherapists and patient in separate locations to see each other and interact in real time (i.e., “synchronously”). The efficacy of CVT is supported by a large body of research (see Fletcher et al., 2018 and Norwood et al., 2018, for reviews). Effective psychotherapies for PTSD, including cognitive processing therapy (CPT) and prolonged exposure (PE), work as well when delivered via video telepsychotherapy as they do in person (e.g., Acierno et al., 2016, 2017; Morland et al., 2014).
Although research clearly supports the efficacy of CVT, rapid change to virtual care comes with legitimate concerns regarding the potential impact of telepsychotherapy on the psychotherapy process. For example, providers have expressed concern about feeling less of a personal sense of connection (therapeutic alliance) or being less able to manage crisis situations when the patient and provider are in different locations (Gershkovich et al., 2016). Prior to COVID-19, patients could select virtual or in-person care while weighing how the pros and cons (e.g., travel, time, cost) impacted their decision. However, in the current climate, patients who may have been less eager to try telepsychotherapy are turning to virtual care out of sheer necessity.
Given the importance of therapeutic alliance in clinical success with trauma survivors, these process factors have been extensively studied in CVT. Notably, the technological landscape has meaningfully changed in the last several years, enabling a broad leveling up in comfort with what used to be considered novel technologies. Smart phones have become ubiquitous. Similarly, both video chat and social media have become a part of every household. With multiple available platforms, such as Skype, FaceTime, Instagram, and Zoom video, consumers regularly use CVT to communicate in their professional and personal lives. Patients’ growing comfort with technology, especially as more people are using it to telework or communicate with family and friends during the current pandemic, may aid their growing acceptance of telepsychotherapy.
Jenkins-Guarnieri and colleagues (2015) examined patient perceptions of care in 15 studies (nine randomized trials and 6 nonrandomized studies) that compared CVT or telephone telepsychotherapy to in-person therapy. Overall, this review found few differences in therapeutic alliance or patient satisfaction between telepsychotherapy and in-person therapy. However, in three of six studies of group therapy, therapeutic alliance was lower in a CVT condition when compared to an in-person condition (Jenkins-Guarnieri et al., 2015). Norwood and colleagues (2018) conducted a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials comparing CVT and in-person delivery of individual cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). They found mean working alliance was lower (d = −.30) in telepsychotherapy when compared with in-person treatment, but this did not result in any difference in clinical outcomes between telepsychotherapy and in-person therapy.
Research indicates that the use of CVT does not affect psychotherapist adherence (Frueh et al., 2007; Morland et al., 2011) or a psychotherapist’s ability to maintain treatment fidelity in the delivery of PTSD EBTs (e.g., Acierno et al., 2016). Psychotherapist competence (e.g., developing rapport, conveying empathy) and adherence (e.g., structuring sessions, providing feedback) to a manualized group CBT have been found to be similar in both delivery modalities (Frueh et al., 2007). Although there is not much specific evidence regarding the use of CVT for non-CBT PTSD interventions, the current findings do suggest that the integrity of specialized treatments can be maintained over CVT.
Prior to COVID-19, it was critical to determine the willingness of patients and providers to use a CVT modality. However, given the current climate, virtual care is becoming less about choice and more about necessity. It is important to note that before the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, many patients, including individuals with PTSD, were highly receptive to receiving medical and psychiatric services using a technology modality (Grubaugh, Cain, Elhai, Patrick, & Frueh, 2008). Research has also demonstrated the acceptability (Brooks et al., 2013) and use (Shore et al., 2012) of telepsychotherapy services among populations underserved by conventional mental health programs, such as Native American and Alaskan Native veterans. Particularly attractive aspects of virtual care include increased flexibility in both time and location of services and increased privacy.
The limited research on patient choice has found that patients have varying preferences. In a study of veterans receiving PE via home-based CVT (i.e., when a patient is receiving care from his or her home using CVT), office-based CVT (i.e., when a patient travels to a clinic to receive care), or in-home in-person care (i.e., when the clinician travels to the patient’s home and provides in-person care at that location), Morland and colleagues (2020) found that home-based CVT was preferred by almost half of the participants, while a third preferred in-home in-person care and a quarter preferred to drive to the clinic for office-based care. In usual times, it would be best to offer a choice of treatment modalities, as each option was preferred by at least a quarter of participants. As we move from preference to necessity during the COVID-19 pandemic, the literature suggests that clinicians should routinely ask their patients about their comfort level with receiving virtual care and address concerns about the modality. Clinicians may be surprised that certain patients are comfortable with CVT and the benefits of offering this modality during COVID-19 often outweigh drawbacks.
Based on the disaster mental health literature, we can anticipate using telehealth tools to deliver two levels of mental health responses during the COVID-19 pandemic (see Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Interventions for Postdisaster Reactions via Telehealth
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Level 1 involves preventative and supportive interventions aimed at reducing acute distress and helping people cope in the aftermath of disaster. These strengths-based interventions can be delivered by clinicians or by trained paraprofessionals. Level 2 interventions involve formal treatment for individuals who have substantial stress disorder symptoms, or who develop PTSD, major depressive disorder (MDD), insomnia, or an anxiety disorder, and require care from a well-trained mental health care provider.
Level 1: Interventions to Reduce Acute Distress and Support Coping
Level 1 interventions encourage positive coping following disasters, at time when people experience dislocation, chaos, and high levels of stress. These brief, strength-based approaches are designed to be nonstigmatizing and transdiagnostic and can be used with individuals who may or may not have a formal mental disorder. It will be especially important to support the psychological well-being of essential workers and medical personnel who are combatting the COVID-19 outbreak (Brooks, Dunn, Amlôt, Greenberg, & Rubin, 2016; Quevillon, Gray, Erickson, Gonzalez, & Jacobs, 2016). These crisis counseling approaches have been widely used in responding to federally declared disasters in the United States. However, the effects of most of these interventions have not been evaluated in research (e.g., Fox et al., 2012). These approaches have usually been done in person, but they could be adapted for delivery via individual or group teleconferencing.
Supportive/preventive interventions
PFA is designed for delivery during the first hours or first week after a disaster (Vernberg et al., 2008). PFA principles include establishing safety, restoring calm, conveying individual and communal self-efficacy, promoting hope, and increasing connection to other people. SPR is designed to follow PFA to help trauma survivors cope during the weeks and months after a traumatic event (Berkowitz et al., 2010). SPR focuses on teaching patients to develop specific skills to help them improve functioning in the posttrauma period; these strategies include problem solving, scheduling positive activities, managing reactions, helpful thinking, and building positive social connections.
Problem Management Plus (Dawson et al., 2015), a five-session intervention delivered by trained paraprofessionals, is one of the few postdisaster interventions that has been tested in a randomized controlled trial. In a pilot study conducted in a region of Pakistan affected by conflict, Problem Management Plus reduced anxiety and depression significantly more than did usual management by a primary care physician (Rahman et al., 2016). There is also emerging evidence supporting the use of interventions aimed at enhancing social support, a protective factor against developing PTSD. A two-session dyadic therapy that focuses on encouraging mutual disclosure and support between members of a couple produced modest reductions in acute stress symptoms after a traumatic event (Brunet, Des Groseilliers, Cordova, & Ruzek, 2013). Such interventions could potentially be adapted for the CVT modality.
Clinicians should not offer psychological debriefing (e.g., critical incident stress debriefing; Mitchell, Sakraida, & Kameg, 2003) as a preventive intervention after trauma. This single-session approach, which has people recount details of a potentially traumatic event shortly after it occurs, was once widely used after disasters. However, research has shown that individual or group debriefing does not benefit adults and may worsen symptoms in children (International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, 2019).
Online tools and apps
Given that nearly everyone in the world may be impacted by COVID-19, the need for support will exceed what can be met solely through direct counseling from mental health providers and paraprofessionals. There are many online and app-based resources that promote the use of positive coping skills that are easily accessible and widely disseminatable to large groups of individuals during a COVID-19 pandemic, without adding burden to the mental health treatment system (Torous, Jän Myrick, Rauseo-Ricupero, & Firth, 2020).
Internet-based interventions based on CBT principles (e.g., psychoeducation, coping skills modules) delivered via computer or mobile phone shortly after trauma had significant effects on worry or PTSD symptoms in three trials that targeted individuals with elevated symptoms (Ennis, Sijercic, & Monson, 2018). This finding parallels other research studies that have reported that Internet-based interventions can be effective in reducing chronic PTSD symptoms (e.g., Lewis, Roberts, Simon, Bethell, & Bisson, 2019). However, these interventions had little preventive benefit in four trials that included anyone recently exposed to trauma, regardless of symptomology (Ennis et al., 2018). Taken together, this research suggests that Internet-based interventions are most successful when used to reduce symptoms that are already present and are less effective when used to try and prevent the development of trauma-focused problems.
A wide range of mobile mental health apps for the self-management of symptoms is available to the public, but few have been tested empirically. Headspace, a popular mindfulness training app, increased positive affect and reduced depression symptoms when compared with a control condition in a small trial (Howells, Ivtzan, & Eiroa-Orosa, 2016). Another app, Calm, has also been shown to improve perceived stress, mindfulness, and self-compassion (e.g., Huberty et al., 2019). The National Center for PTSD has developed several free apps for helping people self-manage symptoms, including PTSD Coach and COVID Coach (Owen et al., 2018). PTSD Coach app produced greater reductions in PTSD severity than a waitlist condition in a randomized controlled trial (Kuhn et al., 2017). COVID Coach is new app designed to help people cope with feelings of stress and anxiety in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Level 1 interventions, delivered by either mental health care professionals or trained paraprofessionals, may be useful in promoting positive coping among people who are experiencing acute distress during a period of pandemic-related uncertainty and disruption. However, when an individual has developed significant mental health symptoms and functional problems that are not resolving on their own, Level 2 interventions are more appropriate.
Level 2: Psychotherapy for Acute Stress Disorder and PTSD
In the wake of COVID-19, it is reassuring to have strong data confirming the effectiveness of evidence-based individual and group CVT telepsychotherapy for PTSD and other trauma-related conditions (e.g., MDD, insomnia). Psychotherapists can offer patients several efficacious therapy options; being able to provide more than one EBT is important considering that no one treatment is acceptable to—or effective for—all patients (Wampold, 2019). Trauma-focused CBTs (e.g., CPT, PE, cognitive therapy) and Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) both have a significant amount of research supporting their efficacy when delivered via in-person modalities (International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, 2019). CBT and EMDR have also been found effective in controlled trials for the treatment of acute stress symptoms in the first 3 months following a disaster (Roberts, Kitchiner, Kenardy, Lewis, & Bisson, 2019). There is also emerging evidence for the efficacy of interpersonal therapy, a PTSD treatment that does not require recounting details of the trauma (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2019).
Telepsychotherapy for trauma reactions via CVT
The most recent VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Acute Stress Disorder (Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense, 2017) recommends using CVT to deliver psychotherapies that have demonstrated in-person efficacy. This recommendation is based on numerous randomized controlled trials that have shown that individual or group psychotherapy for PTSD delivered via CVT is noninferior to (i.e., as effective as) in-person, in-office delivery of the same treatment (e.g., Acierno et al., 2016, 2017; Morland et al., 2014, 2015; Yuen et al., 2015). Although these trials involved trauma-focused CBT, there is no reason to believe that other effective treatments cannot also be effectively delivered over CVT.
Several PTSD studies have explicitly examined the efficacy of home-based CVT. This modality is particularly relevant during the COVID-19 pandemic, as staying at home is an imperative part of the global response to the crisis. In 2015, Yuen and colleagues compared PE delivered via home-based CVT to an in-office, in-person condition among veterans. Clinician-reported PTSD and anxiety symptoms at posttreatment did not differ between CVT and in-office care. In a study with a larger veteran sample, PE delivered via home-based telepsychotherapy had outcomes that were noninferior to in-person PE, both after treatment and 6 months later (Acierno et al., 2017). An additional study compared home-based CVT and in-person delivery of a combination of behavioral activation and exposure for PTSD (Acierno et al., 2016). CVT was noninferior to the in-person modality both for PTSD and depression symptoms at posttreatment and 3- and 12-month follow-up assessments. Most recently Morland et al. (2020) compared three modalities for providing PTSD intervention (i.e., home-based CVT, office-based CVT, home-based in-person) and reported no differences in clinical PTSD outcomes for the provision of PE across all three conditions. Taken together, these studies have established the clinical effectiveness of delivering trauma-focused therapies for PTSD via home-based CVT. Further, these studies speak to the robust nature of our established EBTs for PTSD psychotherapy and the ability to retain clinical efficacy despite patient and provider not being in the same location, such as with COVID-19.
Telepsychotherapy for trauma reactions via telephone
While the majority of telepsychotherapy research focuses on the use of CVT platforms, there are situations where care must be delivered by telephone. Patients without good Internet connection are unable to use CVT. Recent limits on Internet bandwidth associated with increases in telework have also put a strain on CVT connectivity. Therapy delivered via telephone does not require Internet access and can save bandwidth for those patients who strongly prefer, or would benefit more from, CVT-based care.
There is research evidence supporting the efficacy of depression treatments delivered via telephone. Several studies have reported statistically significant decreases in symptoms of anxiety and depression after the administration of an EBT via telephone, particularly among individuals with certain long-term health conditions (Coughtrey & Pistrang, 2018). Additional studies have demonstrated that psychotherapy delivered over the phone can be as effective, or more effective, at decreasing symptoms of depression compared with usual care (Castro et al., 2020).
It less clear whether CBT via telephone is effective for treating PTSD or acute stress disorder, so clinicians will need to use clinical judgment in deciding on its use. Relative to an assessment-only control condition, telephone-administered CBT reduced PTSD symptoms and overall distress among people who underwent stem cell transplants (Duhamel et al., 2010). However, in another study (Freedman et al., in press; reviewed in Roberts et al., 2019), telephone-delivered CBT started within three months of trauma exposure was no better than treatment-as-usual in reducing acute PTSD symptoms. Research on patient acceptability, comfort, and preferences regarding telephone-based therapy is limited, but telephone care appears to be acceptable as other modalities (Cuijpers, Noma, Karyotaki, Cipriani, & Furukawa, 2019). In short, although the research on phone telepsychotherapy is less developed, it has proven effective for treating depression and remains a viable option when CVT telepsychotherapy is not possible.
Clinical Considerations in Delivering Telepsychotherapy for PTSD
Clinical challenges in adapting to telepsychotherapy
Many providers are capable of transitioning to telepsychotherapy, but it requires that clinicians develop some new skills.
Maheu and colleagues (2017), recommend seven core telehealth competencies that clinicians must develop in order to competently deliver telepsychotherapy: The ability to evaluate patients’ suitability for telehealth, a ‘telepresence’ in interacting via video, comfort with the technology, knowledge of legal/regulatory issues, evidence-based practice, an ability to integrate mobile health tools, and telepractice development. We address several of these competencies in the following text.
Regarding patient suitability, the use of home-based CVT raises some unique safety considerations (Gilmore & Ward-Ciesielski, 2019). Even in cases where virtual care is essential, providers should always be assessing psychiatric acuity and risk level to ensure remote safety planning. Although there are no absolute contraindications to the virtual assessment or treatment of trauma patients, the high comorbidity of PTSD and suicide, depression, and substance use, necessitates that providers establish clinical emergency procedures. Providers should also identify an emergency contact during the first remote session and confirm the individual’s location at the beginning of each appointment so that the provider can contact local emergency personnel, if needed, during the session.
In establishing telepresence, it is important to orient patients to expectations and boundaries for meeting virtually. For example, we recommend that providers remind clients that appointments should be treated like office-based appointments; clients and psychotherapists should wear appropriate attire and find a private area in the home to meet. This is often referred to as creating the “virtual therapeutic environment.” It is critical to always have an alternative means of communication, typically telephone, in case the CVT is disconnected and unable to resume for any reason. With PTSD treatment, it is important to observe important behaviors or environmental factors, such as the use of safety behaviors, because the visual field may be limited due to the camera’s location and field of view. For example, an individual may be petting their animal on their lap during an imaginal exposure as a safety behavior, but the psychotherapists may be unable to see the arm moving or the animal out of sight. To help minimize these safety behaviors, psychotherapists can address this when discussing boundaries of conducting home-based therapy and assessing for safety behaviors during session, if appropriate.
Although EBTs for PTSD work well via telepsychotherapy, assigning in vivo exposures for homework may be particularly challenging during a quarantine or shelter in place order. With creativity, in vivo exposures can be accomplished without a patient leaving their home (e.g., using videos or other media for exposure to trauma-related sounds or sights), or can be accomplished without personal increasing contact (e.g., walking past a place while maintain physical distancing). Setting behavioral activation goals that can occur within an individual’s house or yard (e.g., exercise, reading, connecting with others) is also challenging, but possible.
Another challenge in telepsychotherapy is getting patients worksheets and forms for homework and self-assessment. This is an area in which integration of mobile health tools can be helpful. The National Center for PTSD has developed a series of treatment companion apps to support delivery of specific treatments that patients can download for free (Owen et al., 2018). These apps, including PTSD Coach, CPT Coach, and CBTi Coach, reinforce key concepts, facilitate homework completion, enable patients self-monitor symptoms, and provide additional support between sessions.
Psychotherapist comfort challenges in adapting to telepsychotherapy
Ultimately, clinician comfort has been a key driver of the uptake and success of CVT. In many ways, patients are often more ready than their providers to engage in virtual psychotherapy. Psychotherapists need to invest some effort in preparing to deliver virtual care, such as purchasing equipment, establishing proper lighting, and rearranging furniture, if necessary. HIPAA-compliant CVT platforms (e.g., https://doxy.me) or document signing websites (i.e., for signing consent) may need to be purchased. Although these differences can be managed and implications minimized, clinicians can find themselves uncomfortable with these changes when they begin to deliver virtual treatment. Clinicians need to consider legal issues (e.g., state regulations) and privacy risks related to different technology platforms.
The remote delivery of trauma-focused treatment may also heighten psychotherapists’ concerns about managing patient safety (Gershkovich et al., 2016; Gilmore et al., 2019). Providers commonly express the concern that a patient will become dysregulated during the session, and that being alone without a clinician in this situation could be dangerous. Importantly, clinicians who regularly utilize CVT report that emergencies and dangerous incidents are very rare. In fact, a case study of home-based CVT to manage suicidality of veterans with PTSD indicates that CVT is safe and useful in detecting both PTSD and suicidal risk (Gros, Veronee, Strachan, Ruggiero, & Acierno, 2011). As discussed above, appropriate precautions can be taken to ensure that the clinician is capable of responding to a crisis immediately (e.g., identifying an emergency contact), even when meeting with a client remotely. These strategies may be critical in enhancing a provider’s comfort and confidence in delivering telepsychotherapy.
Many providers are rapidly transitioning their practice into either part- or full-time telepsychotherapy in response to COVID-19. Although this involves some new behaviors and changes to clinical practice, advanced preparation and consultation with telepsychotherapy providers can ease the transition.
Long-Term Implications for the Changed Telepsychotherapy Landscape
Despite the strong evidence base supporting the efficacy of telepsychotherapy for trauma survivors, there have been challenges to fully realizing the potential of this modality. The limiting factor for the rapid expansion of telepsychotherapy has not been technological capacity, clinical effectiveness, or patient receptivity—it has been clinician knowledge and comfort. Now that clinicians have been forced to adapt and change, and the greatest barrier to the expansion of telepsychotherapy has been eliminated, CVT may become a permanent part of the mental health landscape. After months of telepsychotherapy, providers and patients may become more comfortable with the prospect of delivering and receiving mental health care remotely. Insurance companies may change their policies to cover services delivered via CVT. Local and national laws may be changed to accommodate long-distance care. Ultimately, these shifts will benefit patients, providers, and the population as a whole.
The establishment of a mental health care system that incorporates both in-person and remote modalities of care will provide greater access to care for patients who are not mobile (e.g., individuals with physical limitations), deployed military personnel, prisoners, and other people with significant barriers to care (e.g., shift workers, stay at home parents). Individuals from underresourced (e.g., rural) communities can get access to a wider range of providers and higher quality care. Telepsychotherapy can link providers with specific clinical specialties (e.g., trauma) or skills (e.g., Arabic-speaking) with patients who have limited access to local providers with these capabilities. Patients may be more likely to engage in therapy and consistently keep appointments if they can flexibly alternate between in-person sessions and CVT appointments during weeks when their schedule does not allow for office visits. The increased use of CVT will allow for a greater uptake of psychological services, particularly for groups who are at higher risk for psychological symptoms, including PTSD.
Increased use of CVT will also benefit providers. When they are willing to use remote modalities, providers can expand their service area to any state or country where they are licensed. Furthermore, flexibly incorporating remote technologies into treatment can be beneficial. For example, a client with PTSD may benefit from a CVT session from his or her home to work on challenging exposures within the home environment. A home-based session may also be beneficial to identify exposure opportunities that the patient may not be aware of (e.g., opening blinds, moving furniture away from doorways). Providers may also be able to work more from their own homes, reducing their own travel time and increasing flexibility around dates/times of services and number of clients they are willing to see. In sum, increased comfort with CVT can greatly improve the quality of care provided as well as practice growth opportunities.
On a systemic level, changing laws and practices to be more accommodating of CVT will result in several large-scale benefits. Such changes will allow for the mobilization of a mental health care workforce to meet peak demand, wherever that demand occurs. For example, providers with an expertise in PTSD EBTs located in New York can see patients in California who have just survived a major earthquake—without leaving their home offices. Expanding telepsychotherapy services will result in the democratization of mental health care, where all individuals have equal and fair access to high quality mental health care, regardless of where they live and the competing demands of their lives.
Conclusion

Acute stress and long-lasting PTSD can occur at high rates following a disaster. Preliminary data from COVID-19 suggests high rates of fear, helplessness, loss, and economic hardship, which can take a tremendous human toll on those who are directly and indirectly exposed. Fortunately, we are living in an age of unprecedented opportunity to virtually address psychological symptoms in the wake of COVID-19, with widely available technologies that enable the delivery of effective treatments via telepsychotherapy. Mental health is uniquely poised to benefit from the ubiquity of technologies capable of supporting synchronous communication between skilled providers and prospective patients who may otherwise not have access to quality care for psychological trauma. Research on telepsychotherapy has demonstrated that this modality shift is not only feasible, but in many cases preferable, and it provides the foundation for scalable solutions that can reduce the significant impact of undertreated PTSD.",
"17": "Telepsychology also called telemental health, or telebehavioral health is broadly defined as the delivery of behavioral health services via technological means, typically across a distance. Telepsychology can be performed in real time (synchronous) or as a delayed correspondence (asynchronous). Within large organizations such as the Department of Defense (DoD), Indian Health Service, and Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), video teleconferencing (VTC) is the most common means of telepsychology. Globally, telepsychology is used to deliver care to remote areas or postdisaster settings. For example, in 2010, telepsychology was leveraged to provide services to Haitians following a devastating earthquake (Augusterfer, Mollica, & Lavelle, 2015).
An important aspect of telepsychology is its utilization in the provision of effective treatments to those at facilities where access to care is limited due to provider shortages and the uneven distribution of low density specialized providers (e.g., pediatric psychiatrists). Research on telepsychology has demonstrated favorable findings related to both process variables (i.e., satisfaction and rapport; Gros, Lancaster, López, & Acierno, 2018; Morland et al., 2015) and outcome variables (Bashshur, Shannon, Bashshur, & Yellowlees, 2016). High treatment acceptability and credibility has also been found with an older adult population (Egede et al., 2016). Randomized trials (Nelson, Barnard, & Cain 2003; O’Reilly et al., 2007; Ruskin et al., 2004) as well as less rigorous studies (Frueh et al., 2007; Tuerk, Yoder, Ruggiero, Gros, & Acierno, 2010) suggest telepsychology is generally as effective as face-to-face (FTF) psychotherapy (Shore et al., 2018) and psychiatry (Hubley, Lynch, Schneck, Thomas, & Shore, 2016). Similarly, evidence-based psychotherapies delivered via telepsychology have generally, though not universally, been found to produce comparable clinical outcomes (Gros et al., 2013). For example, a number of well-designed randomized noninferiority clinical trials have recently been completed in the VA system demonstrating comparable outcomes in telepsychology delivered via VTC and FTF therapy; this includes cognitive processing therapy (CPT) for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Morland et al., 2014), prolonged exposure for PTSD (Acierno et al., 2017), and behavioral activation and therapeutic exposure for PTSD (Acierno et al., 2016).
However, telepsychology is not without limitations. While telepsychology is employed, in large part, to overcome conventional barriers to care, novel challenges inherent in technology-enhanced treatment present a new set of obstacles. These obstacles require unique ethical and legal considerations beyond those required to perform FTF clinical care; for example, the legal ability to provide services in both the location of the provider and the patient. For good reason, researchers and available resources have largely focused on the legal, regulatory, and ethical considerations pertinent to telepsychology (Glueckauf et al., 2018); for example, a telepsychology provider typically needs to be licensed to provide services both in the state where the provider is and the state where the client is at the time of services (in the military medical system providers need to have clinical privileges in both locations). These constraints are well addressed in other reviews and are beyond the scope of the current paper (Brooks, Turvey, & Augusterfer, 2013; Landry-Poole, Pujol, & Moore, 2017); however, information about the actual clinical practice of telepsychology is lacking.
Regarding the logistical and practical delivery of telepsychology services, a survey of telepsychology experts found that adaptations to treatment protocols were recommended for three domains: use of self-report questionnaires, treatment handouts, and in-session examples (Gros et al., 2013). Use of objective standardized outcome tracking measures and self-monitoring logs (e.g., sleep logs) is a part of evidence-based assessment, which is a critical component of evidence-based practice (Beidas et al., 2015; Brewin, 2013). Historically, cognitive-behavioral therapists have been more open to telepsychology than their psychodynamic counterparts (Mora, Nevid, & Chaplin, 2008; Perle et al., 2013); they are also more likely to use treatment manuals in their practice (Becker, Smith, & Jensen-Doss, 2013). Further, a sizable portion of these manualized treatments have worksheets that are core components of the treatment (Shafran et al., 2009). Clinicians attempting to provide these therapies via telepsychology may find themselves confused about how to practically go about providing those services, as distributing and completing worksheets through telepsychology is logistically different than FTF care. The term “in-session examples” refers to the use of visual aids such as a whiteboard or diagram to illustrate a point, facilitate attentional practice, and aid in the evaluation of a treatment target (Beck & Haigh, 2014; Waltman, 2015).
Suitable adaptations in the three recommended domains are demonstrated in the following case series in which telepsychology was utilized to deliver evidence-based treatments to an active duty military population. This case series will comprise three manualized therapies that include worksheets as a key component of treatment. A pharmacological treatment case will also be presented. The focus of these cases will be illustrating the adaptations to treatment protocols for the three domains that Gros and colleagues (2013) suggested (i.e., use of self-report questionnaires, treatment handouts, and in-session examples). Some details have been changed or omitted to maintain anonymity without impacting significant aspects of the case presentations. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
The treatment context for these cases is that these were all active duty service members who were treated in military hospitals via telepsychology by clinicians who were located at a different military hospital. Treatment referrals were made from the location where the service members (SMs) were located and cases were managed through the military health system. This model of telepsychology is different from the VA home-based telepsychology model where the client uses telepsychology from their home. In the military model, telepsychology is used to increase access to care and decrease problems related to provider shortages (Landry-Poole et al., 2017). In these settings, the client sits in a telepsychology room in a hospital and connects with a provider in a different hospital using VTC. There is some support staff available to help provide technical support, assist in appointment booking, and coordinate crisis response as needed. This makes the emergency procedures in these settings different than VA or non-VA settings, which will be reviewed below.
CPT for PTSD via Telepsychology

Sergeant Smith (SGT S; pseudoname) was a noncommissioned officer with almost two decades of service, including five tours of combat. His position became emotionally more difficult when advances in technology allowed SGT S to see high-definition video footage of precision artillery strikes. He previously had never seen the carnage resulting from the attacks. He found himself haunted by these images and he would regularly have nightmares of what he saw.
The military mental health system uses a web-hosted outcome measure service called Behavioral Health Data Portal (BHDP; Brewin, 2013). Screening and outcome tracking measures were administered via BHDP immediately prior to the telepsychology sessions. A clinical interview was conducted and SGT S met full criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). The PTSD Checklist for DSM–5 (PCL-5; Weathers et al., 2013) was administered and he scored in the clinical range with a score of 66. Though SGT S had been exposed to multiple traumas, he was most distressed by the intrusive memories of those he had killed. A chief component of his PTSD symptoms was a prevailing sense of guilt and shame related to his combat experiences; this persistent sense of iniquity is commonly referred to as moral injury in the literature (Drescher et al., 2011). SGT S was presented with his treatment options and selected CPT (Resick, Monson, & Chard, 2007).
CPT is a manualized cognitive-behavioral treatment for PTSD that has been recommended by the updated VA/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of PTSD (VA & DoD, 2017). A noninferiority trial demonstrated the CPT delivered via telepsychology can produce comparable outcomes to CPT delivered FTF (Morland et al., 2014). The goal of CPT is to foster cognitive modification. This involves coming to terms with what happened and integrating this new learning into the person’s belief set. This is typically accomplished through the use of a series of written thought records.
The military version of the CPT manual is available electronically, allowing for worksheets and handouts to be digitally shared with the patient in session via screen-sharing technology. Sharing hard copies of handouts and worksheets with patients via telepsychology can be difficult as it relies on the patient having access to a working printer or the technician printing the handout for the patient (Gros et al., 2013). Worksheets and handouts can be directly sent to the client via encrypted e-mail when that is an option. Some providers also choose to mail a paper copy of worksheets to the client. Typically, before a first session, it is unclear which handouts will be needed with a new patient, and the patient receiving a handout from the technician prior to the session can interrupt the flow of therapy. Also, staffing changes, off-site factors, and responsiveness of the technician can affect the timeliness and availability of technicians to provide worksheets to patients on behalf of the therapist. To account for this, the therapist relied on screen-sharing technology and SGT S’s smart camera phone. The therapist had him take pictures of the computer monitor to capture handouts and the impact statement instructions to facilitate his homework. It is also hoped that taking a picture of the computer monitor will make it harder to lose the information, as people can misplace worksheets, but tend to not lose their smartphones.
To aid with psychoeducation and to test his openness toward incorporating smartphone application technology into treatment, SGT S was provided with the VA application PTSD Coach. SGT S used the smartphone app to access high-quality psychoeducation materials, which he used to talk with his family about his PTSD. He responded well to the application, as there was some difficulty getting the paper CPT worksheets to the patient at the remote site. Consequently, he was introduced to an alternate resource in session. CPT Coach (Pospos et al., 2018; Shore et al., 2014) is a smartphone application that can be used as a supplement to psychotherapy with a therapist who is providing CPT. The CPT Coach application contains the worksheets and handouts from the CPT manual in a free smart phone app, which SGT S preferred as an alternative to hand-written worksheets.
Within the application, SGT S was able to log his stuck points, view electronic copies of the handouts discussed, and complete thought logs to target his PTSD-related beliefs. In session, Socratic questioning was used to evaluate his stuck points; this involved a series of introspective questions to encourage help him break down his thoughts and come to new conclusions on his own. In lieu of a white board, screen-sharing technology allowed the therapist to share a blank word processor document that could be used to weigh evidence and break down concepts. For example, to address his belief that he was a monster we typed out on the shared screen our jointly derived definition of a monster and then used that to evaluate where he fit the definition. We also created a shared definition of the opposite construct: his being a good person. This definition was saved and whenever new evidence of his being a good person was encountered it was added to the word document in session. This accrual of evidence allowed for an aggregating effect on his stuck points and reduction in self-blame. This, paired with continued use of CPT worksheets housed in the CPT Coach app, allowed for his main stuck point to be addressed and restructured. SGT S’s PTSD symptoms gradually decreased to the subclinical range across eight sessions of CPT, with his initial PCL-5 score of 66 decreasing to a 23. He reported decreases in marital problems and increases in life satisfaction. Based on his improvements, he decided to not retire from military service and he extended his contract with the army. At follow up, his PTSD symptoms were still in the subclinical range.
Collaborative Assessment and Management of Suicidality (CAMS) via Telepsychology

Gros, Veronee, Strachan, Ruggiero, and Acierno (2011) and Gros et al. (2013) provide excellent descriptions on how to manage risk in home-based telepsychology. Captain C (CPT C; pseudoname) was a 28-year-old soldier with 7 years of service who presented as a medical referral for individual psychotherapy due to depressive symptoms. CPT C reported his persistent suicidal thoughts had recently increased in frequency and intensity in context of a breakup as well as mounting financial concerns and occupational stressors associated with a new position. He had recently begun drafting a suicide note and had purchased a pistol. BHDP (Brewin, 2013) was unavailable at the remote site at the time of the encounter so paper-and-pencil versions of the measures were administered and then scanned and sent via encrypted e-mail to the provider by a psychiatric technician. At intake, his score on the Patient Health Questionnaire (Löwe, Kroenke, Herzog, & Gräfe, 2004) was a 23 (severe depression), baseline Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS; Posner et al., 2011) was a 5 (lifetime thoughts of suicide with plan or actual behavior endorsed), and current C-SSRS was a 4 (past month thoughts of suicide with some intent endorsed). CPT C met criteria for major depressive disorder but the initial focus of clinical attention was suicidal ideation.
The majority of the initial session was used to assess risk of harm to self; this was completed through use of the CAMS (Jobes, Moore, & O’Connor, 2007). CAMS is an evidence-based clinical approach for assessing, treating, and tracking suicidal risk. The framework is designed to strengthen the therapeutic alliance and to enhance patient motivation through a highly interactive assessment process that is guided by a tool called the Suicide Status Form (SSF; Jobes, 2006). The SSF uses Likert and qualitative items to assess psychological pain, stress, agitation, hopelessness, self-hate, and overall suicide risk. Traditionally CAMS is performed with the clinician sitting side by side with the patient, and the SSF is handed back and forth between the dyad during the assessment.
Prior to beginning the intake session with the patient, the initial SSF was sent from the provider to the technician at the remote site based on the positive suicide screen. Following introductions and consents, CAMS was introduced to the patient. The traditional protocol was discussed as well as the necessary adaptations to conduct the treatment through telepsychology. Specifically, the patient was told a single SSF was meant to be shared and coauthored by the patient and clinician, but would be completed together on two separate copies by each participant during session. As CPT C discussed the constructs and wrote responses on his copy of the form, the clinician wrote the same responses on her copy. In a traditional face-to-face session, this process usually takes 10–15 min. An additional 5–10 min was needed in the telepsychology session to ensure the dyad was accurately recording identical responses.
The interim SSF tracking sheets were completed in the same fashion at each encounter. The provider would e-mail the form to the technician at the remote site, and the technician would print the form and provide it to the patient before he entered the treatment room. Information gleaned from the qualitative responses on the SSF was used to inform treatment interventions in subsequent sessions. The treatment plan and crisis response plan were similarly updated as necessary. At the conclusion of each session, CPT C and the provider kept their own copy of the form, and the therapist’s worksheet was uploaded into the soldier’s electronic medical record for documentation purposes.
The first several sessions were marked by significant declines in severity ratings on the tracking sheets. After five sessions, CPT C was no longer reporting suicidal thoughts. The subsequent session focused on understanding warning signs for possible future episodes of suicidal ideation and additional coping skills to address inevitable life stressors. During the final session, the final SSF was compared side by side with the initial SSF to serve as a visual aid of the patient’s treatment progress.
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia via Telepsychology

Specialist Martinez (SPC M; pseudoname) was a 29-year-old enlisted service member with 3 years of service who presented with symptoms of anxiety and sleep disturbance after sustaining injuries as a result of a physical assault by her husband. Following the assault, she began psychotherapy with a telepsychology psychotherapy provider and telepsychology prescribing psychologist. Trials of two medications for sleep were unsuccessful due to next-day sedation, so she was referred to a cognitive-behavioral treatment of insomnia (CBT-I) group delivered through telepsychology.
CBT-I is an evidence-based treatment that has been shown to be effective for individuals with insomnia. Reviews of the literature show that CBT-I is a standard of care treatment for chronic and severe insomnia (e.g., Morin et al., 1999), with clinical gains that last over the long term. The original protocol described by Perlis, Jungquist, Smith, and Posner (2005) is delivered over eight sessions and contains presentation of the rationale for the treatment, sleep hygiene guidelines (e.g., maintain a regular sleep schedule, avoid alcohol in the evening), diaphragmatic breathing, relaxation strategies, and worry control in later sessions. Sleep diaries are used to calculate sleep efficiency, or the amount of time one is sleeping while in bed, which is ideally in the low 90 percentiles. Importantly, individuals undergoing CBT-I are given a sleep schedule to promote consolidated sleep that initially begins with “prescribing” time in bed to be no more than the average time asleep over 2 weeks according to the sleep diary. Few studies have reported using telehealth for delivery of CBT-I, but one study reported positive results with group CBT-I delivered to veterans (Gehrman, Shah, Miles, Kuna, & Godleski, 2016).
Group CBT-I
SPC M initially engaged in group CBT-I through telepsychology. She was one of six members of a group that met in a conference room with a large-screen TV. The psychologist facilitator of the 5-week, 1.5-hr/week group originated a video-conferencing call to the conference room where participants sat around a large table. During the first session, SPC M told group members that she slept between 4 and 6 hr, on average, per night and her goal was to sleep 8 hr/night. Screen sharing technology was used to show a brief PowerPoint slides presentation relevant to each group session topic. Group success relied on a behavioral health technician at the receiving site to set up the technology, deliver packets of information used for the group, and be available in case of technology glitch. In subsequent groups, the technician collected sleep diaries from participants, scanned and sent them to the group facilitator via encrypted e-mail at the beginning of each group. An electronic sleep diary embedded in a smart phone application called CBT-I Coach developed by the Veteran’s Administration and the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center (TATRC) can be used to record daily diaries and transmit the compiled information directly to the provider, but this application could not be used in this instance because of installation security concerns of nonencrypted transmission.
The second through fifth groups followed a brief CBT-I protocol. Participants were encouraged to use Breathe to Relax, a smart phone application, also developed by TATRC, to practice diaphragmatic breathing daily. SPC M reported early gains in sleep efficiency during the first 2 weeks in the group that were not maintained during the last two groups. She ended with a sleep efficiency of 80.5% and a total sleep time of 6 hr and requested an individual therapist to continue CBT-I.
Individual CBT-I
At intake, SPC M’s anxiety had heightened and she endorsed a suicidal wish to die within the last month, which she indicated was “not a real wish to die,” but a “wish my problems would go away.” She and her primary therapist were working on these problems in weekly psychotherapy, but both agreed she should continue CBT-I. She was also taking hydroxyzine (25 mg) as needed for acute anxiety, but denied using it prior to bedtime. During the intake, screen sharing was used to reinforce how to fill out a sleep diary and to show her a colorful list of sleep hygiene guidelines. She indicated difficulties with nocturnal awakenings when a roommate came in during the night. She described two nightmares/month related to the physical assault and noted functional difficulties during the day. She estimated receiving 6.5 hr of sleep per night with a latency of greater than 60 min and described functional difficulties at work (e.g., falling asleep at work, yawning often, and reduced attention and concentration).
Over the course of three follow-up sessions conducted over 6 weeks, SPC M kept her sleep diary consistently and gained skills calculating her own sleep efficiency. She learned to use problem solving to address nocturnal awakenings, some of which she discovered were due to hip pain, which she addressed with her primary care practitioner. With concomitant psychotherapy, her nightmares ceased. Her sleep efficiency grew from 82% to 97% at the end of treatment and she was able to reach her goal of an average of 7.5 hr of sleep/night. Her scores on the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI; Bastien, Vallières, & Morin, 2001; administered via BHDP; Brewin, 2013) decreased from the clinical insomnia range (ISI = 17; moderate severity) at the beginning of the group to a subthreshold range (ISI = 11) over the course of treatment.
This example of CBT-I in the group and individual setting illustrates the use of screen sharing technology and of treatment-related phone applications. Because of security and privacy concerns with unencrypted transmission in a military population, the sleep diary in the CBT-I Coach was not used. Transmission of the sleep diary in this setting required a behavioral health technician to send the document through encrypted e-mail. Especially in the group setting when patients may arrive at different times prior to the group (i.e., some close to the start time of the group), there can be interruption from this transmission in group start times while the provider accesses the e-mail and prints the diary at one end and the hard copy is returned to the patient in the group at the other. Another issue with using telepsychology in the group setting, in general, is that real-time interactions are not mimicked as well for the leader. That is, when a person speaks, the static camera does not move to track who is speaking and focus on that person as experienced in a FTF group. Our organization subsequently tested a more sophisticated system with voice and movement tracking that was able to simulate a group more fully. However, this system is not without its downsides in that it took some time for participants to adjust to the camera moving to focus on them when they spoke. SPC M adapted to the telepsychology setting well. This example highlights the successful delivery of CBT-I through telepsychology in both group and individual settings.
Pharmacotherapy for PTSD via Telepsychology

First Lieutenant Reynolds (1LT R; pseudoname) was a 27-year-old Army infantry officer with less than 2 years of military service who presented for a medication evaluation. He reported symptoms of depression, irritability, and sleep difficulties connected to his combat deployment to Afghanistan. 1LT R’s deployment occurred less than 9 months following his arrival to his first duty station. As an infantry officer, 1LT R led an infantry platoon on over a hundred combat missions in hostile villages across Afghanistan. Exposed to multiple traumatic events during his deployment, within months of returning home, 1LT R manifested many symptoms associated with PTSD to include intrusive thoughts, dysphoric mood, hyperarousal, hypervigilance, and nightmares. His score on the PCL-5 was 63 at intake and he was formally diagnosed with PTSD.
Prior to presenting for a medication evaluation, 1LT R had completed a partial course (5 sessions) of prolonged exposure therapy. Although he acknowledged that the therapy was helpful, he found it subjectively too difficult to “constantly talk about what happened” and became frustrated with having to take time off from work every week for treatment. He felt that pharmacotherapy would be a better treatment option for him.
1LT R was prescribed sertraline 50 mg daily for his global symptoms of PTSD and prazosin 1 mg each night for his nightmares. Sertraline is a first-line pharmacological intervention for PTSD and is approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the disorder. Prazosin is an alpha-adrenergic antagonist that was originally developed to treat hypertension. However, a number of clinical trials have shown it to be effective at reducing nightmares (Aurora et al., 2010; Nappi, Drummond, & Hall, 2012), although recent concerns have been raised regarding its efficacy (Raskind et al., 2018). Prazosin is not FDA approved for nightmares or PTSD. During the maintenance phase of treatment, 1LT R reached a dose of 150 mg of sertraline and 5 mg of prazosin. He also took over-the-counter melatonin on an as-needed basis.
In addition to dealing with PTSD, 1LT R was also suffering from back and neck pain and migraines related to an injury he sustained during his deployment. Consequently, he was prescribed a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (back and neck) and a triptan (migraines) by his primary care manager. Prior to prescribing medication for his PTSD, a discussion about the potential risks associated with drug-drug interactions occurred. 1LT R and the prescribing psychologist discussed the increased risk of internal bleeding and serotonin toxicity related to his medication regimen (common risks associated with serotonergic antidepressants and medications regularly used for pain management). During the discussion, the drug interaction program Lexicomp was used and the results were shared with the patient virtually. Lexicomp is an online tool that provides important information about potential interactions between medications and offers suggestions to prevent interactions from occurring. Similar programs are available at no cost to the user. As noted in the first case study, telepsychology providers have the capacity to share their computer screen images with their patients. Sharing the details of potential drug-drug interactions visually with the patient resulted in a more thorough and thoughtful discussion regarding potential interactions compared to a typical one-sided psychoeducational exchange. 1LT R stated, “I appreciate you reviewing these potential interactions in detail. If I had not seen them I probably would have forgotten what you said.” In this provider’s experience (author BAM), similar feedback from other patients is common. Discussions about potential drug-drug interactions is important in psychopharmacological practice, however, the level of retention and understanding of this material by patients is oftentimes uncertain. Seeing this key information “on screen” during the discussion appears to increase understanding and retention.
In addition to psychoeducation regarding potential drug-drug interactions, through the same screen-sharing process used for the drug information session, data were shared virtually with 1LT R regarding his progress. The BHDP tracks serial assessments of a variety of instruments to include the PCL-5. Each session 1LT R was able to see his current PCL-5 score and compare it to past scores. Over the course of 9 months he had 12 unique PCL-5 scores, which trended downward with the highest score being at the time of evaluation (63) and his lowest score being at Session 12 (28). Session 12 was the last session of the maintenance phase of treatment. 1LT Reynolds found the ability to track the trajectory of his scores to be highly reinforcing. At one point he stated:
When I can see my scores on the screen and watch how the scores go down over time, it becomes like a game for me. It makes me want to see how far I can go . . . how low I can get my scores . . . how quickly I can get better.
Research has shown that routine use of outcome measures, and the sharing of the results of those outcome measures, increases patient treatment adherence and improves outcomes (Lambert, 2013). Handouts were not used with this patient.
Discussion

An advantage of telepsychology is the increased ability to provide services to patients in low resourced environments (Landry-Poole et al., 2017). This can also decrease the time costs of attending treatment as the individuals treated in this study did not have to venture away from work to receive care. Further, telepsychology allowed for people in need of research-supported treatment interventions to receive quality treatments from providers who were several hours away. Consistent with previous research findings, delivering manualized treatments via telepsychology can be just as effective as FTF care (Shore et al., 2018); however, as noted in the introduction, adaptations to VTC are needed. The above cases illustrate the commonly used adaptations well (Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Observed Adaptations to Telepsychology
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Self-Report Questionnaires
The use of self-report questionnaires (e.g., objective standardized outcome tracking measures and self-monitoring logs) is a part of evidence-based assessment, which is a critical component of evidence-based practice (Beidas et al., 2015; Brewin, 2013). Administering self-report questionnaires from a distance via telepsychology is different than being FTF, but there are several workable solutions.
As illustrated in the CBT-I case example, measures like sleep logs can be filled out on paper forms and then scanned and transmitted through encrypted messenger or emails. This process requires planning ahead and is not feasible for every provider or setting. Some of the smartphone applications discussed above have embedded self-report questionnaires and tracking measures, but there are questions about transmitting the data from the applications to the therapist in a secure manner. As an alternative option, a patient could use the measure in the application and read the clinician a summary. For example, the sleep log in the CBT-I coach will calculate an overall sleep efficiency quotient. A patient could describe his week and then verbally provide the summary figures from the applications. That sleep efficiency figure can then be used to inform that week’s sleep schedule recommendations.
Alternatively, patients may take the standardized measures online through secure web-based assessment surveys, such as BHDP described above. A number of web-based practice management programs allow for the secure transmission and collection of standardized measures and questionnaires but require foreplanning and coordination. Of course, HIPAA concerns would necessitate a business associate agreement and reputable companies will easily be able to provide these to consumers. The above cases benefitted from having a paraprofessional psychiatric technician on site with the patients to help facilitate the BHDP process. If this process was conducted without a technician’s help, clientele would need to be trained to complete the web-based surveys, which might be more difficult for some patients than others. There are alternative procedures that can be used.
When having the patient complete the web-based survey prior to the session is not feasible, the measure may be verbally administered during the session. This will take up some of the session time and may force a clinician to be more judicious about which outcome-tracking measures are utilized. Additionally, there are considerations about whether verbal administration of a measure affects item response, or if this method of administration is in keeping with measure standardization procedures. Future research may look at this topic to inform clinical practice. A list of free and psychometrically sound outcome measures can be found in a previous review (Beidas et al., 2015). As illustrated in the final case example, incorporating outcome tracking into the active components of treatment can enhance clinical outcomes, this being consistent with previous findings (Lambert, 2013).
Treatment Handouts
Treatment handouts and worksheets are a common component of manualized treatments (Shafran et al., 2009). Treatment handouts can be transmitted electronically, printed, filled out by hand, scanned, and sent back electronically. An additional option is that a treatment packet or patient manual can be mailed to the client or facility where the client is being seen to facilitate treatment—this strategy does require extra effort but it is a reliable method. A key take away is that using handouts in telepsychology requires forethought and planning—it is harder to be spontaneous with forms being used in telepsychology. In some cases, digital copies can be used; however, they are not always available and copyrights may limit a clinician’s ability to create a digital copy of an extant form from a treatment manual.
Conceptually, there is a difference between handouts and worksheets. Handouts are informational and easier to use with screen-sharing technology or when using secure e-mail. In the above cases, the providers used screen sharing to share a number of different figures, but this is different from having a handout someone can physically take away with them. A low cost solution is to have the patient take a picture of the screen to capture the information. Software-based solutions such as screen shots might also be workable solutions, depending on whether or not it is a shared device. Additionally, a photograph of a shared screen or a screen shot could be printed for later use.
Many of the newer smart phone applications (e.g., CPT Coach and CBT-I Coach) described above have the treatment handouts embedded in the application. Notably, these mobile health apps were developed by the VA or Defense Health Agency, and so they are secure and free to use. The user’s data is stored on their own device and many of these apps allow for personal identification number locking of the apps data. In these cases, one can reference the application and go over it together with the information already contained in their phones. The CPT Coach app also has an embedded ABC worksheet function that can be used as a thought record if verbally reviewed together. The patient described in the first case preferred this over the paper ABC worksheets as he was less worried about losing it or leaving it out where someone else might read it.
Some manualized treatments specify how the handouts are to be used. This requires careful accommodation when utilizing telepsychology. For example, in CAMS the dyad is supposed to collaboratively fill out the forms together. This can be difficult from a distance but the above case illustrates how planning can allow for the therapist and patient to each have their own copy of requisite forms that they complete together.
In-Session Examples
Use of in-session examples can help increase the attentional focus on the information being discussed and the intervention being used (Beck & Haigh, 2014). This is most often completed through use of screen-sharing technology that is a core function in most telepsychology VTC software. When digital copies of forms are illustrations or figures are available, they can be shared via screen sharing. When the provider needs to create something novel, a blank word processor document can be used as a white board to track or list out the items that might normally be written out in session. In the CPT example, the therapist used this white board function to list out a shared definition of what it meant to be a monster and what it meant to be a good person. Other common software applications can be used as a white board with screen sharing. For example, the common paint applications (e.g., Microsoft Paint, Corel Painter, Krita, MyPaint; SketchBook) can be used to sketch out a concept like a habituation curve. Additionally, screen sharing an Internet search engine can allow for some new in-session example options as the clinician and patient directly research topics together. For example, if a patient is exceedingly hopeless, thinking they cannot go on after a major setback, a provider could look up stories about people who had similar setbacks and went on to have meaningful and happy lives. Providers might choose to address web browser settings so that previous search terms do not autopopulate the search field.
Other Considerations
There may need to be additional modifications and considerations for group therapies. In the CBT-I case example, the group facilitator noted a limitation with the technology. A static camera did not focus on the person who was speaking and a camera that focused in on motion had a lag time. Alterations in the pacing and practice of delivering group evidence-based treatments via telepsychology are likely required. Further research and innovation on the topic are needed.
Additional considerations include patient access to a working printer and scanner. This might not be a static variable and having a backup plan for when technology fails is a requirement in telepsychology care (Landry-Poole et al., 2017). The key is to be flexible and think ahead wherever possible.
The setting where the telepsychology occurs is another consideration; some of the strategies discussed above may need to be modified to suit the needs and resources of different treatment systems of care. Active duty military hospitals have different procedures, than VA home-based telepsychology. VA homebased providers have safety procedures that start before the first session where there is an initial thorough safety screen regarding the suitability and safety of the homebased setting and the risk and protective factors of the clients being served to ensure that telepsychology is an appropriate option. Risk management continues in on ongoing manner, where at the start of the session they verify the physical location of the client so they know where to dispatch emergency services if needed, they verify the callback phone number in case they get disconnected, and they verify the phone number of the emergency contact. In military hospitals, the client is already in a hospital and on-site support staff can physically assist in an emergency.
Both of these procedures can be different from what a psychologist in independent practice might do, and other health systems might have other resources and limitations. Psychologists in independent practice will need to attend to practical and legal matters that we have not elaborated on: these include licensing requirements, HIPAA considerations, and practical considerations related to elements like screen sharing. Brooks and colleagues (2013) have a good review of how to overcome some of the common barriers that exist. Also, the scientific principle or using a pilot study or test run to find and work out potential barriers can be useful. We have attempted to draw out and demonstrate a variety of ideas and principles such that some, but not all, of this might be applicable depending on the setting and available resources. Further innovation is likely to be needed, as creativity and pragmatism is a hallmark of telepsychology. Clinicians in various settings are encouraged to follow the recommendations of Gros et al. (2013) and to make careful adaptations to the following domains use of self-report questionnaires, treatment handouts, and in-session examples, to ensure high quality care is being delivered.
Summary and Future Directions
Evidence-based psychotherapies and pharmacological therapies can be delivered effectively through telepsychology; this is well established in the literature. A recent survey of telepsychology experts demonstrated the need for guidance on how to adapt these practices for telepsychology with a specific focus on three domains: use of self-report questionnaires, treatment handouts, and in-session examples (Gros et al., 2013). The case series above demonstrated feasible workable solutions to address these domains of treatment. Further research and innovation on the topic is needed. Treatment developers may wish to provide guidance on the topic; additionally, they may choose to make available digital materials that can be used in telepsychology to facilitate the intended treatment effects. Research funders may choose to offer grant funding to study and develop adaptations to existing treatment protocols for telepsychology. These cases demonstrate the value of high quality smart phone applications (e.g., PTSD Coach, CPT Coach, PE Coach, CBT-I Coach; Pospos et al., 2018; Shore et al., 2014) that can be used in conjunction with telepsychology to help address the three different domains. Further research on how to best use these applications is needed and development of additional applications will also likely be needed. Journal editors may seek to solicit and publish more practice-focused literature on the topic of adapting evidence-based care to telepsychology settings to further clarify this process for front-line telepsychology clinicians. Graduate-level and postgraduate-level training programs may choose to include supervised training in these adaptations as telepsychology is a growing field of practice.
Statement of Human Rights
All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee (include name of committee + reference number) and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.",
"18": "Child-onset disruptive behavior disorders (DBDs) are characterized by oppositional and defiant behaviors, impulsivity, and aggression (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Young children with behavioral challenges incur considerable costs to society (Moffitt, Caspi, Harrington, & Milne, 2002; Rivenbark et al., 2018). These children are at high risk for continued conduct problems and antisocial problems well into adolescence and adulthood (Babinski, Hartsough, & Lambert, 1999; Lee & Hinshaw, 2004; Mordre, Groholt, Kjelsberg, Sandstad, & Myhre, 2011; Sibley et al., 2011). Recently, Galán, Wang, Shaw, and Forbes (2019) conducted a follow-up study of young children through adolescence and adulthood and found that early onset behavioral challenges were predictive of violent behavior in adolescence and adulthood, adolescent correlates of antisocial behavior, and internalizing problems in adulthood. This study further found that those children with chronic, early problems were at highest risk for multiple types of difficulties during adolescence and adulthood including violent behavior, depression, and anxiety symptoms. Similarly, Rivenbark et al. (2018) found that although young children with early onset and chronic behavioral problems account for only 9% of the population, they account for approximately 53% of criminal convictions, 16% of emergency department visits, and 20% of medical prescriptions in adulthood. These data point to the early childhood period as an important window of opportunity to intervene in the lives of young children with behavioral problems.
Behavioral parent training (BPT) is the most well-studied and efficacious psychosocial intervention for school-age children with DBDs (Chacko et al., 2017). This intervention is based on social interaction theory, which suggests that parents and children engage in a coercive cycle in which both escalate their aversive behavior until one party gives in, which reinforces child noncompliance as well as ineffective parenting techniques (Granic & Patterson, 2006; Patterson, 1982). In BPT, parents and caregivers are taught to lessen the intensity of this coercive cycle by using reinforcement and limit setting skills to simultaneously reduce misbehavior while increasing incompatible “positive-opposite” behavior. Core skills taught include praise, play, direct commands, and time-out (Chorpita & Daleiden, 2009). Implementation of BPT as a first-line intervention is critical in order to improve the lives of youth with DBDs and reduce familial and societal burden (Kaminski & Claussen, 2017).
Graduate programs increased emphasis on evidence-based interventions (EBIs) and state requirements for, and availability of, continuing education courses have led to increased opportunities for training in EBIs. However, data suggest that graduate school training in EBIs for childhood psychiatric disorders is relatively rare when compared with adult-focused EBIs (Pidano & Whitcomb, 2012). Moreover, although individual training elements (i.e., didactics, ongoing consultation, and feedback) are often utilized in graduate training, their combination, which is considered best practices (Edmunds, Beidas, & Kendall, 2013; Herschell, Kolko, Baumann, & Davis, 2010), is less common. Continuing education courses typically focus on didactics and immediate hands-on practice (role-plays) but are rarely individualized and ongoing consultation is not often provided. However, having consultants physically available for training and ongoing consultation is not typically feasible, due in large part to funding and time constraints (Fixsen, Blase, Duda, Naoom, & Van Dyke, 2010).
New technologies provide opportunities to increase the accessibility of high-quality training (Barnett, 2011; Kazdin & Blase, 2011). In particular, online clinician training offers several advantages to traditional methods, including 24-hr access, customization (e.g., self-paced, allowing for repetition and review), opportunity for interactive exercises, and multimedia training components (audio, video, animation, etc.), all of which have been shown to enhance knowledge retention (Khanna & Kendall, 2015; Zhang, 2005). Research has found that using interactive, web-based tutorials combined with live remote coaching can significantly improve therapeutic skills (Kobak, Opler, & Engelhardt, 2007) and knowledge (Brennan, Sellmaier, Jivanjee, & Grover, 2018).
The purpose of the present pilot study was to develop and test a technological platform for training mental health professionals in BPT. This training is innovative in that it paired an online tutorial on BPT’s theoretical principles and four core skills (i.e., praise, play, commands, and time-out) with live remote coaching and role-plays with a trainer in order to maximize participant knowledge and skill acquisition. This project is significant because there is a general dearth of research on the efficacy of online training of psychological interventions, and in particular, despite their increasing usage, little data exist on the efficacy of hybrid training models. Finally, and perhaps most important, no web-based therapist training course that combines these two components and focuses specifically on BPT for DBDs has been tested. The aspects of individualization of the training, immediate tailored feedback, and ongoing consultation are essential to the training intervention that we have developed and offers a distinct opportunity for both students and clinicians. Pilot studies, such as this one, are crucial first steps toward evaluating whether these training models can lead to markedly higher penetration rates of evidence-based practice.
The aims of the study were to evaluate whether the web platform operated successfully, participants found the content satisfactory, and participants’ knowledge of BPT principles and skill improved. Finding preliminary evidence that our training is feasible and acceptable would serve as a first step toward increasing dissemination of BPT training to mental health professionals, thereby increasing treatment availability for parents of children with disruptive behaviors. Initial findings suggesting that we can improve clinicians’ ability to conduct BPT would also lend support for conducting a larger trial to determine whether clinicians who received the training could demonstrate improved outcomes in their clients’ parenting skills as well as improvements in their clients’ children’s disruptive behaviors.
Method

Participants
As shown in Table 1,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
the 26 participants who enrolled and provided consent were primarily female (n = 19; 73.1%), White (n = 21; 80.8%), and, on average, 29.7 years of age (SD = 7.3 years). Half had a bachelor’s degree (n = 13), seven (26.9%) had a doctoral-level degree, and six (23.1%) had a master’s degree. The sample had, on average, 4.15 years (SD = 5.82) of clinical experience, and 16 participants (61.5%) were enrolled in graduate school at the time of the study. The majority of the sample (n = 20; 76.9%) had no prior formal training in BPT.
Procedure
Institutional review board approval was obtained for this study and recruitment occurred between January 30, 2018, and June 28, 2018. Potential participants were recruited through professional listservs and by e-mail announcements to clinical psychology doctoral students at Long Island University Post and New York University. Interested individuals contacted a designated member of the investigative team who determined eligibility and secured informed consent via electronic signature. Eligibility criteria included adults who were practicing clinicians or graduate students in psychology or social work.
Thirty-one people expressed interest in participating in this pretest–posttest open trial and signed consent forms allowing us to send them links to pretraining assessments. Of that number, 26 people completed pretest assessment materials and began the online tutorial. Twenty-two participants completed the online tutorial and 21 subsequently met with a BPT trainer for three video conference coaching sessions (one participant who completed the online tutorial did not complete the coaching sessions or the posttest).
Pre- and posttraining assessment of didactic knowledge and clinical skills
As shown in Figure 1,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Participant Procedure.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
once enrolled, but before accessing the online materials, participants completed the Didactic Knowledge Questionnaire on their knowledge of BPT concepts and principles. We also assessed their clinical skills in conducting BPT with a mock caregiver, who was a member of the research team. Because trainees were located in diverse areas of the country, a web-based interface (Zoom) was used to conduct and record the pre- and posttest of trainee clinical skills. During these video-recorded role-plays, participants were asked to describe the theory underlying four BPT skills (nondirective play, praise, time-out, and commands), teach the components of each skill to the mock caregiver, and role-play administering the skills as if the participant was the caregiver of a child with a DBD (the trainer played a mock child). Each pretest (and subsequent posttest) assessment video of clinical skill was edited by a single member of the research team to remove all evidence of whether it occurred before or after the training. For example, if a research participant remarked that it was nice to see the research team member again, that segment of the video was deleted. Videos were then randomly assigned to the other research team members, who were blind to pretest or posttest recording status. Each video was scored by a single research team member with the BPT skills checklist and the adapted Fidelity of Implementation Rating System (FIMP) continuous rating (descriptions in measures section). Before videos were scored, team members had practiced on mock video segments. Given the structure of the FIMP and the BPT skills checklist, research team members quickly converged on a high level of interrater reliability (all research team members obtained Cohen’s kappas and intraclass correlation coefficients of >.8 for BPT skills checklists and FIMP ratings, respectively) before scoring videos used for data analysis.
After completion of the pretest assessment of knowledge and the role-play, participants were sent a link to access the online tutorial. After completion of the online tutorial, participants completed the System Usability Scale (SUS) and User Satisfaction Questionnaire (USQ; descriptions in measures section) and once again completed the Didactic Knowledge Questionnaire. They then engaged in three live video conference practice coaching sessions (described in the next section) with a BPT trainer who was the same individual who served as the mock caregiver in the pretest. Once the live coaching sessions were completed, the participant completed a posttest role-play assessment identical to the pretest assessment with the same BPT trainer, who again served as a mock caregiver. Participants also completed the Evaluation of Applied Training Scale (EATS; description in measures section) measure of satisfaction with the live training.
Online didactic tutorial
The online tutorial contained 10 modules covering the theoretical principles underlying BPT, key features on each of the four skills covered (labeled praise, positive play, commands, and time-out) and how to effectively teach these skills to caregivers (see Appendix A of the online supplemental materials for a complete description of course content and learning objectives). We determined which BPT skills to include in the online tutorial by reviewing efficacious BPT manuals for parents of young children and selecting skills commonly practiced across these interventions. Second, we compared our list with a study that used a distilling and matching model to determine common practice elements across randomized child treatment trials, including those focused on child behavior problems (Chorpita & Daleiden, 2009). In line with BPT manuals, praise was defined as rewarding a child with verbal and nonverbal approval as a method of reinforcing target behaviors. Participants learned the rationale for emphasizing praise over punishment as well as strategies for effectively praising children (e.g., praising immediately after a target behavior). Play focused on a set of strategies (e.g., reflecting a child’s words, avoiding commands and questions) for shifting caregiver attention from unwanted behaviors to those they wished to increase as well as improving the quality of caregiver–child interactions. Participants were also taught how to help parents effectively structure playtimes and ignore undesired behaviors. Commands were defined as prompts designed to elicit child compliance, followed by contingent reinforcement. Finally, a time-out from reinforcement was taught as a more effective punishment procedure than corporal punishment strategies. Participants learned how to identify target behaviors for time-out, the sequence of steps to follow to carry out the procedure effectively, and how to handle child noncompliance during time-out.
Studies have found that high levels of interactivity, multimodel learning, and ongoing self-tests enhance knowledge retention in online training (Brennan et al., 2018). Thus, the tutorial contains interactive exercises, animated graphics, ongoing interactive self-tests, and video examples of techniques in a multimodal, multimedia, interactive learning approach (visit http://telepsychology.net/BPT_Default.aspx to access the online tutorial).
Live remote coaching
Because didactic training alone is insufficient for acquiring new clinical skills, providing an opportunity for trainees to practice applying these skills was a critical component of the training (Washburn et al., 2019). The primary goal of the 60-min coaching sessions was to reinforce knowledge learned in the tutorial and provide opportunities to model and role-play the use of the skills. To do this, the trainer pretended to be a parent seeking help with a disruptive child and the research subject acted as the therapist. Session 1 focused on praise and play, Session 2 focused on commands and time-out, and Session 3 was flexible, allowing each trainer and participant pair to determine what content was most important to discuss and practice. In Sessions 1 and 2, trainers asked whether the participants had questions about the skill and then asked how the participant thought the skill fit within an operant-conditioning/social-learning model and helped to clarify their understanding. Participants were encouraged to discuss how the skill fit with other previously discussed skills (e.g., how does time-out fit with praise within an operant-conditioning/social-learning model?). Next, trainers focused on three components: the rationale for each skill, how to teach caregivers each skill, and how to role-play each skill with caregivers. Participants were taught the rationale for each skill in order to learn how to explain the purpose of the skill to caregivers, which would likely increase buy in. They then learned how to teach caregivers didactics on specific components of each skill to ensure they could thoroughly describe each step of the skill to clients. Finally, they learned how to role-play to provide caregivers with the opportunity to see each skill modeled before rehearsing it themselves. For example, in this final part, trainers pretended to be a disruptive child and research participants were taught to put the child (trainer) into time-out. In Session 3, trainers answered any remaining questions and asked participants to describe the rationale of all of the skills in an integrated way. The bulk of the session was then spent modeling and role-playing the nuances of skills. Skills were typically practiced with some increased challenges (e.g., time-out with a child refusing to go to time-out).
Measures
User Satisfaction Questionnaire
Satisfaction with the web-based tutorial’s clinical content was evaluated using the USQ (Kobak, Reynolds, & Greist, 1994). The USQ is a self-report measure that contains eight statements pertaining to whether participants found the training to be interesting, easy to understand, enjoyable, useful/relevant, and satisfactory. Users rated their satisfaction on a 4-point scale (strongly agree, agree, disagree, strongly disagree). The scale ranges from 8 to 32 and has good internal consistency (Kobak, Lipsitz, Markowitz, & Bleiberg, 2017).
System Usability Scale
Satisfaction with the technical aspects of the web-based tutorial was assessed with the 10-item SUS (Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2008; Brooke, 1996). The SUS is a reliable, well-validated measure designed to evaluate usability and user satisfaction with web-based applications and other technologies. On a 0 to 100 scale, a SUS score greater than 50.9 (mean rating for systems considered “okay”) is considered evidence of system user friendliness (Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2009; see Appendix B of the online supplemental materials for a copy of the SUS).
Evaluation of user satisfaction with applied training
The EATS was used to evaluate satisfaction with the live coaching. It assessed trainees’ perspectives on how much they learned from the live training, their self-assessed competence on the various skills covered, and their level of satisfaction with live training components. The EATS has been used previously in studies of live online training (e.g., Kobak, Wolitzky-Taylor, Craske, & Rose, 2017; see Appendix C of the online supplemental materials for a copy of the EATS).
Didactic knowledge questionnaire
To assess changes in participants’ knowledge of BPT concepts and principles (causes of noncompliance, operant conditioning, praise, play, commands, time-out), participants completed a 54-item, multiple-choice questionnaire created by the investigators before and after completing the online tutorial. Each item tests participants’ understanding of key critical concepts covered in the tutorial.
BPT skill checklist
To assess change in skill at delivering BPT content, 13 videos were taken of each participant role-playing with trainers, both before they accessed the online tutorial and again after they had completed both the online tutorial and live coaching. Three videos were recorded for each of the four parenting skills (explaining the rationale for the skill to a parent, teaching a parent the steps involved in implementing the skill, demonstrating how to role-play the skill with a parent). The time-out skill included a fourth video on how to role-play handling noncompliance with time-out. Trainees’ pre- and posttraining videos were blindly evaluated using the BPT Skills Checklist (see Appendix D of the online supplemental materials for a copy of the checklist), which assessed the key points they were expected to address in each of the role-plays for each skill. Play included the largest number of key points (n = 29), followed by time-out (n = 27), praise (n = 24), and commands (n = 14).
Adapted Fidelity of Implementation Rating System
Participants’ pre- and posttraining videos were also blindly rated using an abbreviated form of the FIMP (Knutson, Forgatch, Rains, & Sigmarsdóttir, 2009). The FIMP is a coding system that was created to measure therapists’ adherence to the Oregon model of parent management training (Forgatch, 1994) along five dimensions: Knowledge, Structure, Teaching, Process Skills, and Overall Development. Scores on the FIMP have been found to predict parent-training outcomes, such as improvement in children’s disruptive behavior (Thijssen, Albrecht, Muris, & de Ruiter, 2017). The FIMP is typically used to evaluate sections of BPT sessions that span 10 min or more. Given that the segments that were rated in the present study were much shorter (often 2 min or less) and were role-plays of specific skills, some of the items on the FIMP did not apply. For example, the original FIMP assesses how well practitioners explain homework assignments to clients, which did not apply in our case. We primarily used the knowledge and teaching subscales of the FIMP. Investigators rated each of the 13 pretraining and posttraining role-plays on a 9-point Likert scale. As on the original FIMP, scores between 1 and 3 were categorized as “needs work,” scores between 4 and 6 were categorized as “acceptable,” and scores between 7 and 9 were categorized as “good work.” The mean scores for each parenting skill were computed by adding the three FIMP ratings (rationale, teaching, and role-play) and dividing by three.
Results

Satisfaction
Satisfaction with the clinical components of the online tutorial was assessed with the USQ. As shown in Table 2,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. User Satisfaction Questionnaire Mean Satisfaction Ratings of Online Tutorial
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
on a scale from 1 to 4, with 1 signifying strongly disagree and 4 signifying strongly agree, overall, participants were satisfied with the online tutorial (M = 3.46, SD = .67) and would recommend it to others (M = 3.5, SD = .67). Participants found the online content interesting (M = 3.36, SD = .73), easy to understand (M = 3.73, SD = .46), enjoyable (M = 3.5, SD = .67), and useful/relevant in teaching them to help parents with noncompliant children (M = 3.68, SD = .48). Although still high, participants were less enthusiastic about their ability to apply these skills to clients (M = 3.23, SD = .43). This was expected, as the rating was made prior to live coaching and was one of the reasons for adding live coaching to the online content. Relating to the technical components of the online tutorial, participants rated the “system usability” score for the online tutorial as 86.7, which is between “excellent” and “best imaginable.”
With respect to the live coaching, scores on the EATS indicated that overall satisfaction was high (M = 3.81, SD = .40). Trainees reported that the live coaching enhanced their professional expertise (M = 3.81, SD = .40) and facilitated answering their questions (M = 3.95, SD = 2.2). This rating was also on a scale from 1 to 4, with 1 signifying strongly disagree and 4 signifying strongly agree. Similarly, as shown in Table 3,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Mean Ratings of Self-Assessed Competency on Behavioral Parent Training Skills Pre- and Posttraining (N = 21)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
trainees’ self-ratings of competence in using the four core BPT skills were low before training, ranging from 2.2 to 2.8 (on a scale from 1 = very little to 5 = a great deal), and high after training, ranging from 4.3 to 4.6. All four mean ratings were significantly higher at posttest than at pretest, with very large effect sizes.
Knowledge
Mean scores on the Didactic Knowledge Questionnaire evaluating trainee knowledge of the theory and practice of BPT at posttest (M = 40.36, SD = 4.93) were significantly higher than at pretest (M = 21.82, SD = 4.03; t = 18.24, p < .001). The effect size of the difference was very large (Cohen’s d = 3.889). As shown in Table 4,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Mean Self-Ratings on the Evaluation of Applied Training Scale
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
after completing both training components, applicants rated their knowledge of the rationale for each of the four parenting skills and the practical steps for teaching each skill as very high, with mean scores for each rating reaching almost the top score of 5, which corresponded to “a great deal.”
Skill
Using the BPT checklist, we rated participants’ skills on a series of structured role-plays at pretest and after participants had finished both online tutorial and remote coaching. Before training, out of 96 possible points, the average participant demonstrated 27.4 skills (SD = 14.2), and after training, the average score was 59.6 skills (SD = 12.6). The difference in means was statistically significant (t = 9.4, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 2.4). As shown in Table 5,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 5. Mean Number of Therapist Skills Demonstrated on Checklist of Trainee Behaviors Pre- and Posttraining (N = 21)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
ratings of each of the four skills also showed statistically significant improvements from pretest to posttest, with very large effect sizes. Similarly, as shown in Table 6,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 6. Mean Adapted Fidelity of Implementation Rating System (FIMP) Scale Scores, Pre- and Posttraining (N = 21)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
blind continuous ratings of skill, using the adapted FIMP scale, revealed statistically significant improvements on observed skill in using all four BPT domains (all ps <.001), with very large effect sizes.
Duration of Training
The mean number of days taken to complete the online tutorial was 27.04 (SD = 19.25, range = 2–66). The mean total duration of training (online tutorial plus remote coaching) was 69.57 days (SD = 23.70, range = 34–117).
Discussion

The purpose of this study was to develop a multicomponent, technology-based platform with the potential to train large numbers of mental health professionals in BPT. Findings suggest that the training platform increased trainees’ knowledge of BPT concepts and principles as well as improved BPT skills. Moreover, trainees reported high levels satisfaction with the online tutorial content as well as with the live remote coaching. Overall, the findings of this preliminary study are encouraging and indicate high potential for the BPT technology training platform to meet a significant limitation in the field, namely, limited access to engaging, efficient, and effective approaches to training mental health providers in BPT. The training platform initially provided an online tutorial, which allowed for self-paced acquisition of material, interactive self-tests with feedback, and video case vignettes of skill implementation. Following the online tutorial, trainees were provided live, remote coaching via videoconference. The coaching provided the essential opportunity to learn how to use the BPT skills through modeling and role-playing with feedback—essential to skill acquisition (Herschell et al., 2010). Evaluation of skill competencies is a critically overlooked aspect of continuing education programs. Use of web-based technologies can help facilitate this important aspect of training. Some have even suggested a competency-based system for awarding CE credits (Washburn et al., 2019).
Results of the study demonstrated that following the training, participants self-reported high levels of understanding and competence in the concepts, principles, and techniques of BPT. It is important to note that trainees had low levels of self-reported competence at pretraining, with a relatively large standard deviation. It is likely that the large effects are driven by those trainees with initial low levels of initial competence. Importantly, self-reported increases in competence were paralleled by data demonstrating increases in observed skills. Specifically, on average, the number of steps of a BPT skill that was implemented correctly nearly doubled in all areas following training (see Table 5). Similarly, observed ratings of the quality of each skill implemented increased considerably from pretraining to posttraining (see Table 6). These observations of improved quantity and quality of BPT skills implemented suggested that this brief technology-based platform changes behavior in substantial ways—effect size data for the observed rating were large across all outcomes.
Acceptability of a training approach is an important outcome, particularly when the training approach is to be disseminated to an audience with varying backgrounds (e.g., student trainees vs. licensed mental health providers; those with varying comfort with technology). As such, developing a user-friendly and highly acceptable training platform was a key goal of this study. Results of the study demonstrated that participants strongly agreed that the online tutorial was presented in a useful, relevant, and easy-to-understand manner. Moreover, participants rated that they were able to apply the skills and, overall, were satisfied with the tutorial. The data strongly suggest that this platform serves as a strong foundation for learning BPT specifically and CBT approaches more generally.
The study had limitations that provide important context to better understand the findings and also point to future directions in this line of research and clinical training. First, this pilot study was an open trial with no control group or randomization to condition. This structure limits conclusions about causality, as it does not control for external threats to validity, such as regression to the mean, maturation, or history (Sapp, 2017). Another limitation is that study participants did not adequately represent the full range of mental health practitioners in the field. As an example, social work professionals are centrally involved in the delivery of interventions for children and families; however, only one participant in this study had a social work background. Moreover, the modal primary theoretical orientation of study participants was behavioral/cognitive–behavioral—individuals who are likely motivated to acquire further training on interventions, as this one did, that align with their particular orientation. The sample was also homogenous with respect to gender, ethnicity, and years of experience, potentially limiting the generalizability of findings to men, people of color, and more experienced clinicians. The online training was designed to cover fundamentals of social learning theory and BPT, which may be less useful for more advanced clinicians. However, the live supervision was conducted at the level of the trainee’s skill and often focused on advanced topics, such as implementation and flexibility for particular presentations.
Beyond the representativeness of the sample, there were additional limitations. Most of the measures we used to assess outcomes were either adapted from other measures (e.g., the FIMP) or created by us. Although they have high face validity, measures with documented strong psychometric properties would inspire more confidence in the results. In addition, we did not assess BPT skills in the context of naturalistic therapy sessions with a parent. As such, our data are proxies for skills implementation and fidelity. Lastly, we did not assess longer term maintenance of BPT skills. Given that there is often a decrement in skills over time (Schoenwald, Garland, Southam-Gerow, Chorpita, & Chapman, 2011), the extent to which changes following training are maintained remains an unexplored issue.
Despite the limitations of the study, the findings point to important clinical implications and future directions. First, findings suggest that the technology platform offers a user-friendly and effective approach to training both students and professionals in key, but limited, aspects of BPT. Importantly, relative to traditional, oft-used face-to-face training, the technology-focused training platform is efficient, while remaining effective in teaching concepts and skills. To our knowledge, there are no other technology-based training approaches to BPT—a surprising state of affairs given the common presentation of disruptive behavioral problems in clinic settings and the prominence of BPT as a first-line treatment approach. Given our findings, a fully developed, technology-based training platform offers an opportunity to bridge the research-to-practice gap through significantly increasing the availability of BPT by increasing the number of professionals trained in this intervention. In particular, incorporating this technology-based platform may be especially useful as part of formal training opportunities (e.g., continuing education courses, coursework in graduate school).
Although useful, this technology-based platform requires further development to maximize its potential. In this regard, future development and research efforts must focus on incorporating other common BPT skills (e.g., active ignoring), understanding whether the live remote coaching results in incremental effects over the web-based tutorial, considering how best to further support individuals who respond differently to initial training efforts (e.g., adaptive, ongoing training), considering what additional approaches may be needed to ensure maintenance of training effects over time, and ensuring translation of clinical skills from analogue to actual naturalistic practice contexts. As a case in point, the four BPT skills were chosen because they are the foundation for which subsequent skills are administered (e.g., praise is an essential skill that underlies other skills, including shaping and planned attention). Future research examining whether there are particular skills that lend themselves to a hybrid or traditional face-to-face platform is a critical next step in order to move the field forward. This study suggests that this technology-based platform offers a strong foundation for training, which has the potential for significantly advancing the dissemination of a highly effective intervention for a ubiquitous childhood mental health challenge.",
"19":"In the United States, many of the states with the lowest percentage of licensed psychologists also have the highest number of people with mental illness (Hamp, Stamm, Christidis, & Nigrinis, 2014). Psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers commonly establish their practice within higher-population, affluent, urban areas and larger cities with one or more major universities (Kazdin & Blase, 2011). On the other hand, across the United States, approximately 20% of the population, or 60 million people, live within rural areas (Stamm, 2003; U.S. Census Bureau, 2015). Even accessing mental health treatment within larger cities and affluent, urban areas can be difficult for many people dealing with mental health issues because of transportation issues (Collins, Westra, Dozois, & Burns, 2004). One potential ingredient to a more comprehensive solution to limited access to mental health treatment based on geography or transportation is telepsychology. A survey after a 3-month study using telepsychology for child assessments indicated that approximately 97% of parents appreciated eliminating the need to commute (Elford et al., 2001).
The American Psychological Association (APA) defines telepsychology as the use of telecommunication technologies to provide psychological services (APA, 2015). This paper’s discussion of telepsychology is limited to the use of video-conferencing technology to deliver psychological services. This includes video-conferencing technology to connect participants in different medical centers, computer to home, and remote therapy utilizing smart phones. Telepsychology offers psychologists and clients a number of advantages over traditional, in-person modes of therapy. Individuals’ physical restrictions, limited time, or psychological symptoms can hinder their ability to attend sessions in person (Martin, 2013). Telepsychology can help psychologists begin to overcome these obstacles.
Psychologists practicing within rural communities are more likely to encounter current and past clients during community activities, confront interconnected relationships within their own familial and social networks and those of their clients, and even face intersecting business interests (Schank & Skovholt, 1997). These overlapping roles can lead to a number of ethical dilemmas to navigate (Pope & Vasquez, 2011). Telepsychology can decrease the probability of these situations by granting psychologists the ability to extend their practice beyond geographical limitations (McCord et al., 2011). This can also result in a larger pool of potential clients rather than relying on members of the surrounding community (Centore & Milacci, 2008). Additionally, telepsychology could be used to connect individuals with psychologists who are fluent in their language or competent with their diagnosis or multicultural concerns (Hailey, Roine, & Ohinmaa, 2008; Yellowlees, Marks, Hilty, & Shore, 2008).
Evidence also suggests that telepsychology adoption may result in lower costs across a variety of settings. A study comparing delivery methods for treating bulimia nervosa indicated that telepsychology was $2,024.28 cheaper per recovered client than in-person therapy (Crow et al., 2009). Studies on telepsychology adoption within correctional facilities show savings ranging from $12,000 to $1 million in savings (Deslich, Thistlethwaite, & Coustasse, 2013). Between 2006 and 2010, the U.S. Veteran’s Administration recorded a drop of approximately 25% in psychiatric admissions and length of hospitalization for telepsychology patients (Godleski, Darkins, & Peters, 2012).
The question of telepsychology’s effectiveness has been examined since 1967, when it was first successfully used to connect mental health providers in Boston’s Massachusetts General Hospital in with patients nearly three miles away within Logan International Airport (Dwyer, 1973). Backhaus and colleagues (2012) conducted a thorough meta-analysis examining multiple aspects of telepsychology including randomized clinical trials (RCTs) comparing clinical outcome data between in-person therapy with telepsychology. Results suggested that outcomes in symptom reduction and levels of functioning were similar between telepsychology and in-person therapy when treating people for issues depression, anxiety, PTSD, or substance abuse. More recently, results of a similar 2018 meta-analysis of two-dozen RCT noninferiority studies indicated telepsychology is as effective as in-person therapy when treating individuals diagnosed with anxiety, depression, PTSD, and adjustment disorder (Varker, Brand, Ward, Terhaag, & Phelps, 2018).
Telepsychology practitioners in the United States must comply with a complex set of state laws and federal requirements outlined within the Affordable Care Act, H.R. 4872 (2010) and the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Furthermore, for psychologists specifically, there are a number of American Psychological Association (APA) requirements for telepsychology competency, ethical considerations, and data security (American Psychological Association, 2015). Although these additional requirements are reasonable and necessary considering the potential risks involved, they may contribute to psychologists’ decision to exclude telepsychology within their own practice.
A common barrier to telepsychology that psychologists within the United States face is the possibility of practicing across state lines (Kramer, Kinn, & Mishkind, 2015). Although the APA acts as a nationwide accrediting body for education and training programs for psychologists (APA, 2016), individual states maintain control over enforcement and licensure requirements for individual psychologists to protect members of the public. When practicing across state lines, such permission is typically temporary (if granted), and therefore considering a long-term telepsychology practice often requires formal licensure in multiple states. Laws concerning the practice of psychology focus on the location of the client and not that of the psychologist (Kramer et al., 2015). As a result, the psychologist must meet interjurisdictional practice requirements within the state in which the client is currently located (APA, 2015; Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, 2016a). Some states may allow psychologists licensed out-of-state to practice under specific conditions for anywhere from 10 to 30 days within a calendar year (DeAngelis, 2012). California’s Board of Behavioral Sciences (BBS) released a bulletin warning consumers that when they travel, if they contact their psychologist for assistance using the Internet, a phone, or any electronic method, the psychologist must first verify that the state the client is in will permit them to provide therapy (California Board of Behavioral Sciences, 2016).
Another issue facing psychologists interested in implementing telepsychology is using a network and video-conferencing platform that is HIPAA compliant. Although HIPAA’s Security Rules protect an individual’s electronic patient health information (ePHI), it does not apply to videoconferencing. However, HIPAA’s Privacy Rule does (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2010). Among the HIPAA Privacy Rule’s requirements are access and audit control, breach notification, person or entity authentication, transmission security, workstation security, device and media controls, and a security management process (HIPAA). HIPAA does not certify the compliance of software, but companies willing to assume responsibility for collected data can claim HIPAA compliance.
Skype, a popular and free video-conferencing software package, meets some HIPAA requirements such as entity authentication and robust encryption by current standards to facilitate transmission security (APA, 2014). Where Skype falls short is audit control, meaning its inability to monitor accesses to ePHI. Skype also lacks breach notification to let administrators know when unauthorized users access ePHI (APA, 2014). As with HIPAA compliance, the robust requirements surrounding data encryption and security can be a daunting task (APA, 2015). Experts in computer security and cryptography have argued that it is not possible to develop tamper-proof computer systems, only tamper-evident ones (Schneier, 2011). Considering how little direct control psychologists maintain once they transmit data outside the walls of their practice, fears of data theft may be another source of reservation against use of telepsychology. There are services such as BetterHelp, Regain, TalkSpace, and Breakthrough that advertise HIPAA compliance, and may include confidentiality agreements, robust data encryption, and liability insurance imbedded within the package. Standards continue to evolve in terms of coverage that are enabling increasing opportunities for practice and the market attempting to overcome barriers. Along those lines, Maheu et al. (2017) point out (and are attempting to address) the substantial need for tools to assist clinicians as they sort through available technologies and objectively determine which ones are clinically appropriate for their practice.
Psychologists using telepsychology expecting financial reimbursement from health insurance companies or publicly funded health care programs must first verify for each client if, and under what conditions, the third party will reimburse them for their services. Although Medicare does not specify where a psychologist has to be located (e.g., health clinic, independent practice, at home), it will not cover telehealth interventions unless the client receives treatment within a doctor’s office, hospital, authorized health care center, or nursing facility (Medicare, 2016). Blue Cross and Blue Shield, an association of health care insurance providers insuring more than 106 million individuals (Blue Cross and Blue Shield, 2016a), will reimburse for telepsychology if the psychologist is part of specific online care providers network (Blue Cross and Blue Shield, 2015, 2016b).
A number of states have passed legislation requiring private insurance companies to cover policyholders seeking telepsychology treatment. Arizona’s Telemedicine Reimbursement Parity Act (2013) requires private insurers to cover individuals receiving health services (including mental health) via video conferencing if they live in counties with populations under 900,000 or people who live more than 30 miles from the nearest city. The California Insurance Code (2011) prohibits private insurers from requiring individuals meet in-person with health care providers, or from dictating the type of setting they meet within. Meanwhile, a number of states including Florida, Idaho, Kansas, Nebraska, Nevada, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and North Carolina do not have laws mandating private insurers cover telepsychology.
Although no research to date has looked at personal or environmental characteristics of psychologists as predictors of telepsychology adoption (or any health care provider group for that matter with telehealth), a potential guide may be found in research investigating adoption of evidence-based practices (EBPs) examining individual and setting characteristics as potential factors in the adoption of new practice approaches. This is not to conflate EBPs and telepsychology, as telepsychology may be a modality for implementing EBPs, but it is itself not an EBP. These factors include individual characteristics such as older age, female sex, White race/ethnicity, fewer years of experience (Aarons et al., 2010), treatment setting, treatment focus, and organizational culture (Aarons, 2004).
Results from a study of 322 clinical service workers representing 51 different mental health programs for children, adolescents, and their families indicate adoption of EBPs depends on organizational qualities and individual attributes (Aarons, 2004). Higher positive attitudes toward adopting EBPs were seen in intern-level practitioners rather than more senior practitioners, and those with higher levels of education. Understandably, organizational culture and mission are also contexts for change. When required to adopt EBPs by the organization, providers working in day-treatment programs had more positive attitudes toward adoption of EBPs than practitioners working in outpatient programs. Providers also reported more positive attitudes toward EBPs when working within organizations with lower levels of bureaucracy, wraparound programs, and programs with written practice policies (Aarons, 2004).
Perle, Burt, and Higgins (2014) examined psychologists’ self-reported attitudes toward telepsychology. Close to 80% indicated they viewed telepsychology interventions as effective, but 42% viewed telepsychology less effective than in-person therapy. Almost 75% of the sample also indicated they were not likely to refer someone for telepsychology services. Results revealed that scarcity of referral sources, privacy issues, legal concerns, client safety, perceived lack of research, reimbursement concerns, and insufficient training resulted in hesitation to adopt telepsychology. Additionally, early career psychologists (practicing 10 years or less) report higher levels of concern about insufficient training with telehealth (Glueckauf et al., 2018). Topics emphasized among those interested in further training were ethical and legal issues, efficacy data including research comparing telepsychology with traditional modalities, safety/crisis information, reimbursement procedures, system costs, and training in setting up a telepsychology practice (Perle et al., 2014).
The purpose of the current study is to identify significant demographic, organizational, and clinical factors of psychologists’ use of telepsychology within their practice. Based on previous literature examining the adoption of new practice approaches (Aarons, 2004; Aarons et al., 2010; Perle et al., 2014), it is hypothesized that the following variables will predict greater intention to use telepsychology: older age, female gender, White race/ethnicity, fewer years of experience, a more highly structured treatment setting, rural location of practice, the existence of organizational policies concerning telepsychology, and previous training in the use of telepsychology. The selection of these factors was guided by their potential for informing future interventions aiding telepsychology adoption at both the individual and organizational levels.
Method

Participants
To participate, individuals had to (a) be aged 18 or older, (b) possess a doctorate, (c) be a licensed psychologist, and (d) be currently practicing psychotherapy. A database of potential participants was generated using psychology newsgroups, membership rosters from professional organizations, and counseling center mental health facility websites. These sources were selected because they allowed outside research invitations and provided a large enough pool of potential participants for adequate analysis. Data were collected from July 6th, 2017 until July 26th, 2017 and resulted in 1,799 completed surveys. Eight surveys were discarded because participants provided implausible answers to both their age and years in practice, or they entered nonsense answers to a significant portion of the survey or the validity check question (“In one sentence or less, what do you think the purpose of this study was?”). This yielded a total of 1,791 complete and valid surveys (see Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Summary of Participant Characteristics
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Sample demographics on age, gender, and race/ethnicity are similar to provider statistics within a 2015 APA report (Stamm, Lin, & Christidis, 2017). The sample also had representation from all 50 states, as well as each treatment focus and approach proposed within the survey.
Measures
Participants were asked to provide demographic data about themselves (age, gender, race/ethnicity, years in practice), and information about their practice including their practice location (urban, suburban, rural), training and current use of telepsychology (yes or no), and whether policies permitting telepsychology exist within their organization. Participants were asked, “What is your theoretical therapeutic approach (select all that apply)?” and “What is the treatment focus of your primary mental health services setting (select all that apply)?” Most of these items were simple demographic items commonly used in psychology research studies, and no formal scales had been developed to date assessing the constructs in any more comprehensive way. As a result, all items were researcher-generated and informed by foci of previous studies. Because all items are standalone, no indices of internal reliability are applicable.
Procedure
Potential participants received an e-mail invitation to participate in a 10-min study that “examines the feasibility of different treatment approaches in mental health practice.” No reference to telepsychology was made in the recruitment e-mail in an effort to not select for psychologists who were highly interested in telepsychology. Participants who followed the HTML link in the e-mail were presented with an institutional review board-approved informed consent document, to which they had to agree to participate. Then, participants were presented with a screener section of the Qualtrics web platform and had to respond affirmatively to the following questions to be allowed to participate: (a) Are you licensed to practice as a psychologist in the United States?; (b) Are you currently practicing psychotherapy?; and (c) Are you at least 18 years of age? Participants then completed a number of questions about themselves and their practice. They read the following: “For the purpose of this survey, ‘telepsychology’ refers the use of video conferencing technology to provide psychotherapy.” They then answered questions about their use of telepsychology.
Data Analysis
Three logistic regressions were run to examine potential statistical predictors of current telepsychology use. The first included the following predictors: age, gender, race/ethnicity, existence of organizational policies supporting telepsychology, prior training in the use of telepsychology, and geographic location of practice. The second including the following dummy-coded (0 vs. 1) primary practice setting predictors: Correctional facility, geriatric facility, academic medical center, VA, individual/group practice, residential treatment facility, and school/university. The third included a number of dummy-coded treatment foci of participants’ primary practice setting. These analyses were conducted using SPSS Version 24.0 (Arbuckle, 2016). Significance was established at an alpha level of .05, two-tailed.
Results

Logistic Regression 1
A logistic regression was used to model the binary variable of current use of telepsychology (with not currently using as the reference category) and with binary statistical predictor variables of gender (woman vs. other), race/ethnicity (White/European American vs. minority), rural location or not, the existence of organizational policies supporting telepsychology, whether participants have received training in the use of telepsychology, and the quantitative predictor variable of age (years of clinical practice was fully multicollinear, so age was chosen instead). The model provided a statistically significant prediction of current use of telepsychology, χ2(6) = 383.81, p < .001. The Nagelkerke pseudo R2 indicated the model accounted for 29.8% of the total variance.
When controlling for the other factors, the likelihood of participants using telepsychology was approximately 8.74 times higher for psychologists practicing in organizations where policies supporting telepsychology exist (p < .001) than those practicing within organizations without supporting policies. Also, psychologists who had received training in telepsychology were 2.25 times more likely (p < .001) to use telepsychology than those who had not. The likelihood was .46 times lower for psychologists practicing in rural areas (p = .002) versus nonrural practitioners. No other factors exerted a unique effect on current use of telepsychology (see Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Variables in Logistic Regression 1
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Logistic Regression 2
A second logistic regression was used to model the binary variable of current use of telepsychology using binary predictor variables reflecting the setting participants practice within. Although all participants were included in the analysis, practice setting categories that were endorsed by 15 or fewer participants, irrespective of the size of their practice, were not given their own dummy code which resulted in excluding specific comparisons for psychologists practicing in a career center, employee assistance program, or religious organization. The model provided a statistically significant prediction of current use of telepsychology, χ2(7) = 63.015, p < .001. The Nagelkerke pseudo R2 indicated the model accounted for 5.3% of the total variance.
When controlling for the other factors, the likelihood of participants using telepsychology was 3.37 times higher for psychologists practicing in Veterans Affairs Medical Centers (p = .001) than non-VA psychologists. Psychologists practicing in individual or group practice were 2.86 times higher for (p < .001), than psychologists working within public or institutional settings such as hospitals, schools, and geriatric facilities. No other predictors exerted a unique effect on current use of telepsychology (see Table 3).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Variables in Logistic Regression 2
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Logistic Regression 3
A third logistic regression used binary predictor variables reflecting focus of treatment in their primary mental health services setting. The model provided a statistically significant prediction of current use of telepsychology, χ2(54) = 158.172, p < .001. The Nagelkerke pseudo R2 indicated the model accounted for 13.1% of the total variance.
When controlling for the other factors, the likelihood of participants using telepsychology was approximately 1.86 times higher for psychologists focusing on sports performance (p = .020), 1.83 times higher for life coaching (p = .002), 1.70 times higher for treating narcissistic personality (p = .008), 1.60 times higher for treating addiction (p = .004), 1.47 times higher for marital and premarital counseling (p = .011), 1.42 times higher for focusing on parenting (p = .040), and 1.42 times higher for treating eating disorders (p = .049). The likelihood was .69 times lower for psychologists providing testing and evaluation (p = .024), .67 times lower when treating grief (p = .012), .64 times lower with treating bipolar disorder (p = .006), .64 times lower when focused on treatment compliance/medication management (p = .028), .60 times lower when treating obesity (p = .022), .50 times lower when treating antisocial personality (p = .024), and .47 times lower for psychologists focused on racial identity (p = .009) when compared with psychologists who did not identify with each category. No other factors exerted a unique effect on current use of telepsychology (see Table 4).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Variables in Logistic Regression 3
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Discussion

For the purpose of this paper and this discussion, the use of the term telepsychology refers the use of video conferencing technology to provide psychotherapy. Telepsychology has the ability to help psychologists assist individuals who, for a number of reasons, may have reduced ability to attend traditional in-person therapy. The purpose of this study was to examine factors that statistically predict psychologists’ decision to use telepsychology in their own practice. Generally, results revealed psychologists are more likely to use telepsychology if there are telepsychology-supportive organizational policies in their place of practice and if they believe they were adequately trained to use telepsychology. This finding is similar to previous research literature in which mental health providers reported more favorable attitudes toward adopting new EBPs when their organization has written policies in place (Aarons, 2004). This also aligns with previous research indicating that two thirds of psychological professionals, especially early career practitioners, perceived they did not possess sufficient training to work with their clients using telepsychology (Glueckauf et al., 2018; Perle et al., 2014).
There was a higher likelihood of using telepsychology among psychologists who provided life coaching and those who treated individuals with narcissistic personalities. It is possible that the percentages for coaching and performance consulting were higher because those activities may encounter fewer regulations than others. Also, psychologists within U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Centers or practicing in an individual/group practice were more likely to use telepsychology. The VA results are not surprising when the importance of policies and training on use of telepsychology are considered. The VA has implemented a very robust, multistage training program to teach practitioners how to initiate and conduct telepsychology and telehealth interventions. They have also established a number of policies concerning the use of telepsychology and continue to address current interjurisdictional barriers blocking VA practitioners from using telepsychology to treat veterans across state lines when veterans are not within a VA facility (Authority of Health Care Providers to Practice Telehealth, 2017). Their continued endorsement of this mode of treatment is evident in the more than 2 million telehealth sessions used during the fiscal year of 2016 to assist veterans within their care, and their rollout of VA Video Connect system allowing veterans to participate in telehealth sessions using their own computers and smartphones (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2017). Conversely, the increased use of telepsychology among psychologists in individual/group practice may be the result of working within a low-bureaucracy environment where psychologists themselves can make their own decisions about telepsychology clinical practice. With that said, the level of reported favorability was not as high as VA psychologists which may reflect a slight fear of sanctions as a potential limiting influence.
Results also indicated higher likelihood of telepsychology use among psychologists who provided marital/premarital counseling, or parenting support. These results align with a study by Aarons (2004) indicating that practitioners within wraparound programs for children and families were more likely to adopt new EBPs. Also, parents receiving counseling via telepsychology rated their satisfaction with the experience very highly, in part because it was easier to fit sessions into their schedules by avoiding commute times (Elford et al., 2001).
On the other hand, psychologists were less likely to use telepsychology if they practiced within a rural area. This result was unexpected considering telepsychology could allow practitioners in rural areas to reach a greater number of individuals while decreasing the chances of dual relationships (Centore & Milacci, 2008; McCord et al., 2011). It may be the case that rural practitioners judge their resources are too limited to acquire and support a telepsychology platform, although future research on this topic is required.
Psychologists focused on treatment compliance/medication management, bipolar disorder, obesity, grief, and antisocial personality were less likely to use telepsychology. Perhaps those who were treating more acutely ill clients were not using telepsychology because they felt doing so entailed unnecessary and increased risk. Psychologists who provided testing and evaluation were also less likely to use telepsychology. Although some common assessments have been validated and normed using telepsychology, many require adapting the assessment or finding an alternative assessment if adaptation cannot be accomplished (Luxton, Pruitt, & Osenbach, 2014). Also, while performing a battery of assessments, it is common practice to incorporate relevant interpersonal interactions into the final assessment. Psychologists working in this area may perceive they can achieve a more comprehensive assessment in-person. It may be that they work within institutions or locations that more easily facilitate in-person interactions.
The current findings suggest that identifying as a woman was not a significant statistical predictor of telepsychology use. This is in contrast with the results of a study indicating that women who provide mental health services were more likely to adopt EBPs when compared with men (Aarons et al., 2010). These results do agree with results from an earlier study demonstrating women were no more open to adopting EBPs than men were (Aarons, 2004).
Age was also not found to be a significant statistical predictor of telepsychology use. Preliminary analysis revealed age and experience were highly correlated with one another, so because of this, only age was tested as a predictor. The multicollinearity of the two variables means experience would have yielded a similar result. This was unexpected in consideration of previous literature indicating older individuals and individuals early in their careers were more open to new EBPs (Aarons, 2004; Aarons et al., 2010). However, it does undermine the stereotype that older individuals are less likely to adopt new technologies.
Implications
The results suggest a number of implications. Organizations interested in implementing telepsychology may benefit from creating policies supporting its use and provide adequate training, as these were the two biggest statistical predictors of use. For example, the VA has developed very specific policies surrounding the use of telepsychology (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2017), which might account for the substantial increased use of telepsychology found in the current study among psychologists working in the VA.
For government and regulatory entities, creating clear, specific, and consistent laws governing the use of telepsychology could potentially encourage more psychologists to treat individuals currently restricted from mental health services by time or geography. States with too few mental health professionals might make telepsychology more useful and easier to use by easing current rules concerning interjurisdictional practice. The Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) is already moving in this direction and has developed Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT), intended to facilitate telepsychology across state lines (Association of State and Provincial Psychology, 2016b). States that enact PSYPACT into law would allow psychologists to conduct telepsychology with clients located within other PSYPACT states without holding a license in the client’s state. Currently, only eight states have enacted PSYPACT legislation at the time of this writing. The findings from this study could potentially support the passage of such legislation as a way to increase psychologists’ adoption of telepsychology. Additionally, legislation requiring insurance companies to reimburse for telepsychology sessions may increase psychologists’ perceptions concerning telepsychology’s ease of use and usefulness for themselves and their clients. Currently, there are 30 states that have passed such laws with another seven with proposed legislation under consideration (American Telemedicine Association, 2017).
Limitations and Future Directions
The current study possesses a number of limitations and as a result offers directions for future research. Internet-based surveys can lead to bias because the researcher has no control over who chooses to participate (Anderson & Kanuka, 2003; Leary, 2012). This form of sampling may have led to a participant sample possessing a higher level of acceptance of technology than a more comprehensive but costly sampling method. Despite this limitation, the geographic diversity across all 50 U.S. states was only achievable using an Internet-based approach. A large proportion (65.5%) of participants indicated they worked within independent practice, whereas the APA reports this sample characteristic should be closer to 44.7% (Stamm et al., 2017). As a result, conclusions based on these findings may not be fully reflective of the population of practicing psychologists in the United States and should be made with caution. The results contained a mix of large-, medium-, and small-sized effects. The large sample size allowed the analyses to pick up on even small-sized effects, though the implications of these findings should be tempered accordingly when considering small-sized effects. Also, considering the large number of analyses, there is an increased likelihood that some results, especially the results with smaller p values, are a result of chance. Consequently, caution should be maintained when interpreting these results.
Another weakness in the current study is that participants were not asked to specify if they were primarily connecting to clients at home, a clinic, or somewhere else. Also, participants were not asked how much telepsychology is a part of their overall practice. Doing so would have provided a more comprehensive and nuanced picture of how telepsychology is being implemented. For example, a number of neuropsychology assessments are not appropriate, or have not yet been fully adapted, for use via telepsychology. Data concerning what aspects of telepsychology are working well, what forms of telepsychology need work, and what activities of treatment or assessment currently disqualify telepsychology as a viable option could provide a more complete exploration of psychologists’ perceptions and experiences about telepsychology. Additionally, demographic predictors such as gender, socioeconomic status, and race/ethnicity of clients were not examined to determine whether some populations vary in their receptivity or responsiveness to telepsychology. Future research in this direction may reveal additional considerations for psychologists when contemplating telepsychology’s place within their practice. Another potential area for further research is to understand why rural psychologists reported a lower likelihood of adopting telepsychology compared with nonrural ones, despite the benefits of a larger pool of prospective clients across the state(s) in which they are licensed, and the improved access to mental health services for rural populations.
Finally, the current study did not seek to determine what barriers to adoption exist for psychologists across a variety of treatment emphases. It is also important to examine current challenges to telepsychology’s overall effectiveness. Asking these questions in future research could elucidate what features are required to facilitate different interventions, and indicate which ones are not currently adaptable and where psychologists perceive current methods and technologies fall short of what is needed to engender lasting and substantive support for demonstrably effective interventions using the technology.
Conclusions
Psychologists were more likely to engage in telepsychology if they had received specific training in it, or practice in a setting with policies supporting the use of telepsychology. Psychologists with particular treatment emphases, working within the VA, and to a lesser degree, psychologists in a group or individual practice were more likely to use telepsychology. On the other hand, psychologists within rural areas or some treatment emphases were less likely to use it. Organizations, training institutions, application developers, private organizations, and public institutions can all play a part in shaping current and future psychologists’ perceptions concerning the use of telepsychology. Doing so could benefit a number of regions in the United States by increasing access to mental health services for people who are currently facing no treatment options.",
"20": "If you are one of those lucky psychologists who is invincible and immortal, don’t bother to create a professional will. But it’s a good idea for the rest of us
—(Pope & Vasquez, 2016, p. 123).

The creation, maintenance, and destruction of client records are ethical and legal imperatives for mental health providers (APA, 2007, 2017; Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA], 1996). Until recently, physical, hardcopy paper was utilized regularly for client notes (Lustgarten, 2015; Lustgarten & Elhai, 2018). Presciently, Devereaux and Gottlieb (2012) predicted that record keeping processes would almost all be digital in the future. Since then, many providers have moved to technological solutions for record keeping such as electronic medical records (EMRs) and cloud storage (Elhai & Frueh, 2016; Lustgarten, 2015; Steinfeld & Keyes, 2011). Amid this transformation, notes—considered protected health information (PHI)—are increasingly stored in novel settings that might hamper ethical standards when utilized (e.g., maintaining privacy, transferring records, maintaining information, and deletion of obsolete data).
Mental health providers are utilizing more technology than ever before for the provision of services and other ancillary tasks (Elhai & Hall, 2016; Norcross, Pfund, & Prochaska, 2013). As a result, more digital data is being created than ever before. Varnado (2014) suggested that the consequences of a worldwide “digital footprint” should be considered, as information may be created and potentially stored online indefinitely. The advent of indefinite online record storage raises a somber but important question: What happens to digital records in the event that a provider unexpectedly dies, moves without notice, or becomes otherwise incapacitated (hereafter, collectively referred to as “unexpected departures”)?
In response to the growth of digital records, a growing chorus of popular media outlets and technology companies are calling for the development of “digital wills” for the general public (Evans, 2019; Kasket, 2019; Pinola, 2019; Reynolds, 2019). These advance directives can help give autonomy to users and notify next of kin/trusted contacts about accounts, usernames, and passwords. Overall, this information can help others find important digital belongings that might otherwise go missing or stored on data centers in perpetuity. Without explicit instructions, survivors can be left in dire straits after an untimely death or disappearance—sometimes left to guess usernames and passwords to gain access into accounts.
For mental health providers, the creation of a digital and/or “professional will” is a growing imperative, as it can provide direction for survivors (Guy & Souder, 1986; Pope & Vasquez, 2016; Steiner, 2011). However, a minority of people (44%) in the general public of the U.S. create wills (Jones, 2016). Jones (2016) explained people are more likely to have a will if they are older and wealthier and/or more educated (i.e., by age and socioeconomic status [SES]). This national research is consistent for mental health professionals, as many neither plan for nor communicate with clients their protocol for managing clinical records in the event of an unexpected provider departure (Garcia-Lawson, Lane, & Koetting, 2000). Becher, Ogasawara, and Harris (2012) and Cohen (1983) posit that providers’ anxiety and discomfort talking about death might influence whether a discussion ever occurs, resulting in a lack of planning and preparation for these events. Even when created, wills often require legal representatives and time to process the directives; meanwhile, clients must wait for their records.
While a psychologist’s filing cabinet could previously be unlocked and pulled open to reveal client records, advancements in technology now allow records to be stored via digital means, protected through encryption, and kept at offsite data centers (Lustgarten, 2015). By law, mental health providers are mandated to securely collect, maintain, and destroy protected health information (PHI), even when they are storing client data on a third-party server/device (Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health [HITECH], 2009). To meet this obligation, psychologists frequently sign business associate agreements (BAAs) with companies that provide digital backups. By enforcing a BAA, providers and companies rely on their respective security infrastructure; various services highlight meaningful security protections as a result (e.g., International Organization for Standardization [ISO] certifications and Service Organization Controls [SOC 1, 2, and 3] audits for cloud storage backup at one provider; Google Inc., 2020a).
This progression of technology combined with regulatory efforts, which aim to protect clients’ privacy and confidentiality, may simultaneously prevent them from accessing their data should a provider unexpectedly depart. Indeed, initial adequate protections to preclude unintended access may ultimately hamper subsequent, intended access to digitized records without advance directives to guide the actions of legally authorized parties (i.e., unable to login to services/accounts and usernames/passwords when they are unknown, navigating two-factor authentication).
McGee (2003) highlighted that incapacitation and death can wreak havoc, most especially, on clients (p. 394). Researchers suggest that the unexpected departure of a provider might contribute to grief, trauma, anger, and despair (Beder, 2003; Garcia-Lawson et al., 2000; Levin, 1998). Various scholars emphasize the meaningful impact caused by the death of a provider in this way (e.g., Bram, 1995). For instance, Garcia-Lawson, Lane, and Koetting (2000) posit that the “secure holding environment” for therapy is threatened in these moments (p. 86). While all providers are at risk of an unexpected departure and would be wise to prepare their record keeping practices accordingly, the potential for increased psychological distress among clients during such an unfortunate occurrence offers a compelling rationale to act sooner rather than later.
Psychologists may grapple with their clients’ existential anxieties better than their own. Nevertheless, planning for potential unexpected departures is a vital component of responsible practice and applies to all psychologists, regardless of current health status or age. What follows is a vignette illustrating the importance of planning in advance for the unwanted realities of life:
As an early career psychologist, Dr. Nguyen joined a group practice where she developed a specialty in working with adults recovering from childhood trauma. Repeatedly neglecting to lock the group practice doors and failure to maintain timely clinical notes prompted Dr. Nguyen’s colleagues to express concerns about her performance. She begrudgingly sought a medical opinion at their behest and was ultimately diagnosed with early onset dementia. Aware that many of her clients had formed strong attachments to her during their intense trauma therapy, Dr. Nguyen feared that alerting them to her situation could cause harm. She sought immediate consultation from the ethics committee of the state psychological association and senior psychologists in the practice. Dr. Nguyen ultimately delivered to her clients the news of her diagnosis and unanticipated early retirement in a compassionate and straightforward manner. Her offers to provide warm hand-offs for continued psychological care with trusted colleagues quelled remaining concerns about fundamentally disrupting the clients’ therapeutic progress. While this quick and deliberate action prevented immediate harm to clients, Dr. Nguyen required substantial assistance to transfer HIPAA-compliant clinical records to their new providers. This turn of events mobilized her colleagues to define in their formal intake paperwork the specific procedures for client records in the event of an unexpected provider departure.
As this vignette with Dr. Nguyen highlights, further considerations are needed when using technology for record keeping. After the death or disappearance of a provider, clients’ accessibility to data, maintenance of records, future providers’ access to shared files, and destruction of obsolete notes may be meaningfully impacted. While technology has been seen as facilitative and assistive, we posit that the consequences of said advancements should be carefully considered. We review advancements in record keeping technology, legal considerations, ethical concerns, and recommendations for potential unexpected departures of providers who use technology to create, store, and maintain client records. Moreover, we provide specific recommendations that may help clients in continuity of care and access to records should a provider depart.
Advancements in Record Keeping Technology

Well before the advent of the personal computer, providers of mental health services kept paper records. However, physical records were vulnerable to thieves, loss, floods, fires, and other disasters. One of the most famous instances of burgled, paper-based psychiatric notes occurred during President Nixon’s administration. The “Pentagon Papers” whistleblower, Daniel Ellsberg, was the victim of the White House’s efforts to smear his reputation through the theft and use of these records (Krogh, 2007). With a large enough threat actor, paper-based records could be a liability to various ethical standards (e.g., Privacy and Confidentiality and Maintenance of Records).
Eventually, the rise of the personal computer allowed the general public to use digital word processing programs (Isaacson, 2014). Word processing applications (e.g., Microsoft Word) allowed users to save files locally (on their own computers). While this advancement and affordability of personal computers empowered providers to transition to this new technology, similar threats to ethical obligations arose. For instance, even locally stored digital records are vulnerable to computer theft, hacking, accidental deletion, hard drive corruption, obsolete software/hardware, and natural disasters.
Today, psychologists are able to save psychological records and notes in cloud storage solutions. These “cloud-based” services utilize servers traditionally housed in data centers across the globe to ease access and provide backup data solutions should one server fail. Many cloud storage companies utilize data duplication to ensure clients/users can nearly always access their files and allow for redundancies. Thus, one file could be duplicated across servers and centers. Should a fire occur at one data center, the duplicated data would remain accessible from other locations. In an effort to reduce unintended breaches to data stored on these cloud providers, companies request and ascertain external audits (e.g., SOC 1, 2, and 3).
Moving to digital means of record keeping and fee management has made practices more efficient and accurate (Agno & Guo, 2013; Bates & Gawande, 2003; Campanella et al., 2016; Chaudhry et al., 2006; Chin & Sakuda, 2012). Where previous errors in directives and integrated care were caused by poor handwriting or could be lost amid other records, technology has helped to alleviate and avoid the most grave problems. Moreover, EMRs allow providers in both medical and mental health care to view each other’s notes and have a longer history of treatment. And yet, digitizing records—whether on a local hard drive, cloud-based storage, or EMR—has led to novel concerns. The following section examines various legal considerations from federal, state, and organizational levels.
Legal Considerations

Federal Policy
Whenever psychologists create and store client information, they are ethically responsible for the privacy and security of those records, as detailed in APA’s (2017) Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (hereafter referred to as the APA, 2017 Ethics Code). Additionally, various federal policies dictate a legal duty for mental health practitioners to effectively safeguard sensitive health data, a mandate illustrated by HIPAA (2013) and sections of the Code of Federal Regulations, such as Title 45 provisions relating to administrative data standards commonly called the “Security” and “Privacy” rules (Security & Privacy, 2018).
Originally signed into law in 1996, HIPAA (2013) outlines 18 specific indicators of PHI that need to be protected, including (but not limited to) names, dates (e.g., client session and birth date), e-mails, and mailing addresses (University of California Berkeley, 2020). HIPAA (2013) explains that those using, interacting, and creating information about physical and mental health patients/clients must use industry standards and practices to secure privacy. Moreover, the act is intended to help patients/clients transfer their data between providers when necessary (e.g., taking a new job with a different insurer and/or moving to another location).
Along with advancing technology and the enactment of HIPAA, other federal laws have contributed to the proliferation of electronic records as a means to store PHI. For instance, the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 (HITECH) in part directs health care providers to manage client records electronically, leading to third-party providers marketing their services as “HIPAA compliant” (e.g., Dropbox, G Suite, and TherapyNotes). This self-designated title (i.e., not certified by the government) suggests but does not verify that a company has taken precautions to follow “reasonable” steps to help prevent unintended breaches of confidentiality (45 CFR §164.308(a)(8)). Despite HIPAA’s (2013) detailed expectations for what gets protected and how, Becher et al. (2012) explained that it neither outlines nor contains language regarding what providers should do if they were to die or experience another form of unexpected departure. Should a provider unexpectedly depart, records transferred to a new custodian would need to remain HIPAA compliant (Tessier, Keegan, & Ash, 2018). Without preparation, data stored in EMRs and/or cloud-storage solutions may be abandoned, lost, eventually deleted due to inactive subscriptions/lapses in payments/failure to reactivate, or retained beyond their need/use case (i.e., retaining obsolete records).
State Policies
While there is an absence of definitive guidance regarding unexpected departures at the federal level, some states provide requirements and recommendations for the handling of records should a provider become unavailable. For example, Tennessee has codified into licensing regulations that recent clients must be notified of a provider’s departure, unless fewer than two sessions have been held in the past 18 months (General Rules Governing the Practice of Psychologists, Senior Psychological Examiners, Psychological Examiners, and Certified Psychological Assistants, 2014). However, the medium and manner of this communication can take different forms, such as posting a notification at the practice and in the local newspaper, that may or may not reflect the aspirations of the APA (2017) Ethics Code. The same regulation further states that an employment contract may designate a colleague to notify patients of a psychologist who departs a group practice. In Nebraska, mental health care facilities that plan to dissolve must first notify the Department of Health regarding the location of all patient records (Nebraska Administrative Code, 2003). Still, other states offer no regulatory or statutory guidance for unexpected provider departures. The varied nature of these stipulations (and lack thereof) between states is a testament to the need for clear directives to navigate unexpected provider departures. When possible, providers should take reasonable steps to inform themselves of regulations and statutes relevant to the jurisdiction in which they practice (McGee, 2003).
Field-Specific Directives
Compared with other health professions, there are relatively few guidelines for mental health providers who unexpectedly depart. Johnson and Barnett (2012) urge the intentional development of strong collegial relationships with other psychologists who may be called upon for support in the event of serious illness. Steiner (2002) details steps for creating and engaging such an “emergency response team” (p. 1) for psychotherapists. However, the paucity of information contrasts with guidance for physicians.
A sizable body of literature provides guidance to physicians regarding unexpected departures. The American Medical Association (2007) advises that patient medical records be immediately available to an authorized person (e.g., succeeding physician) following unexpected departures. State-specific obligations following a physician’s death are plentiful. For example, Tessier and colleagues (2018) outline the importance of prompt patient notification as well as scrupulous attention to medical records retention and liability insurance for Missouri physicians. Physicians in Alabama and Delaware must ensure that patients are notified of their provider’s departure, with the latter requiring official notice in the local newspaper as well as first class postal mail notification to ensure adequate access to their medical records (Medical Practice Act, 2016; Professions & Businesses, 2016). The Illinois State Medical Society (2014) provides a thorough sample letter template for notifying patients of their physician’s death.
Within the field of psychiatry, the American Psychiatric Association (2007) delineates policies and procedures for unexpected psychiatrist departures. Perhaps their most notable recommendation is the appointment of a “special administrator” to manage practice affairs alongside the executor of the psychiatrist’s will. This special administrator should ideally be a psychiatrist (or at the very least someone who is well-versed in medical record keeping). In a similar vein as the aforementioned patient notification template available to physicians, the organizations provide a sample letter for notifying patients of their psychiatrist’s unexpected departure as well as procedures for transferring care. The American Professional Agency (2016) provides specific directives to psychiatrists planning to close their practice regarding patient and stakeholder notification, transferring patient care, releasing and retaining records, as well as maintaining necessary liability insurance.
Professional Wills
Various authors in the field of psychology recommend drafting a professional will (Barnett & Johnson, 2008; McGee, 2003; O’Donnell, 2006; Pope & Vasquez, 2016). These advance directives, written before unexpected departures, contain language about what other people should do to help transition clients, records, and communicate with relevant parties about the loss of a provider. Pope and Vasquez (2016) wrote “A professional will is a plan for what happens if we die suddenly or become incapacitated without warning. It helps those whom we designate to respond to our clients’ needs and to the unfinished business of our practice” (p. 123). Specifically addressing client records, Pope and Vasquez (2016, p. 125) suggest that “clear instructions” be provided to designee(s) regarding client information, including a place for each client’s preferred contact method and how records should be maintained.
Wills may require substantial time for directives to be completed by executors and designees. Cohen (1983) notes that wills, alone, might be insufficient as their reading and execution may delay timely notification of departure and record access to clients. Time might also be critically important to securing client records. Professional wills may not account for the advanced security and privacy protections on digital accounts that use timed account deletion when inactive (e.g., Google’s, 2020b Inactive Account Manager), two-factor/two-step authentication (i.e., using a separate, token/code that is entered after a username and password), encryption in transit (protected messages when sent to servers) and at rest (when housed at a data center) without third-party providers holding decryption keys, or service/security personnel trained to authenticate and allow changes by only the account holder. These advancements in technology protect people’s data from unintended breaches and mishandling, while also potentially keeping out those with a legal responsibility to help clients transition if their provider were to unexpectedly depart.
Ethical Considerations

APA’s (2017) Ethics Code serves as a foundational text for mental health providers’ ethical decision-making; containing, both principles and standards in the text, with the former informing the latter. Principles are largely seen as aspirational, while the standards are considered enforceable within the organization (APA, 2017). O’Donnell (2006) acknowledged that the unexpected death of a mental health provider has “ethical, clinical, and legal implications” (p. 45). Numerous ethical standards are relevant to unexpected departures when using digital record keeping; this article focuses on six of them.
Standards 3.12 Interruption of Psychological Services and 10.09 Interruption of Therapy both highlight the need to prepare (e.g., make “reasonable plans”; APA, 2017, p. 7) for unexpected departures in an effort to protect client welfare. Similarly, O’Donnell (2006) suggested that “psychologists have a responsibility to plan for their unexpected deaths to the extent of facilitating transitional services” (p. 46). Without preparation, unexpected departures risk the abandonment of clients (Bram, 1995). By preparing for a smooth transition, a client may be notified of an unexpected departure from their own provider or another known third-party before learning about it from an obituary or local news (O’Donnell, 2006). As mentioned, continuity of care may be impacted meaningfully by unexpected departures, as transferring digital records may be severely delayed or impossible.
Section 4 details standards for privacy and confidentiality. Standards 4.01 Maintaining Confidentiality, 4.02 Discussing the Limits of Confidentiality, and 4.04 Minimizing Intrusions on Privacy may help providers make informed decisions for their clients. In absence of appropriate planning, transfer of protected patient data to a third-party may jeopardize privacy and confidentiality (Cohen, 1983). To help ameliorate this concern, providers could appoint a business representative positioned to comply with HIPAA and integrate relevant information (e.g., name of custodian) during ongoing informed consent processes. When these steps are taken, clients’ distress from losing their provider rightly becomes the paramount concern. Complicating this process, digital records may be in a highly confidential and secure storage system, inhibiting access to other providers; ironically, too confidential and secure for effective continuity of care.
Finally, Standard 6.02 Maintenance, Dissemination, and Disposal of Confidential Records of Professional and Scientific Work emphasizes employing secure and private methods for record keeping, minimizing data entered into databases, and making plans to “facilitate the appropriate transfer and to protect the confidentiality of records and data in the event of psychologists’ withdrawal from positions or practice” (APA, 2017, p. 9). Unexpected departures may hamper the maintenance of records, as mentioned, but would likely be worsened for a former client who then, much later, seeks their notes. Essentially, what records could be shared or communication paths would exist for a former client who wants to have their records? For example, at a Midwestern university counseling service, the providers often require a formal attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) assessment and diagnosis before continuing psychiatric care. If a former client were unable to acquire the former assessment/consultation data from a provider, this could meaningfully impact care and medication management.
APA’s Guidelines for Record Keeping and Telepsychology

The APA has created specific guidelines to serve and aid providers as they consider working with record keeping (APA, 2007) and telepsychology (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists [JTF], 2013). Each set focuses on key components and concepts to supplement the APA (2017) Ethics Code. Guidelines from both publications are reviewed in this section, chronologically by publication.
Record Keeping Guidelines
The record keeping guidelines offer 13 specific suggestions, ranging from providers having the primary responsibility for record management and maintenance to the disposition of records (APA, 2007). Four guidelines—5, 7, 9, and 13—from this publication are reviewed, as they are more related to data after death. Guideline 5: Maintenance of Records specifically addresses the importance of maintaining “updated” and “organized” notes/information (APA, 2007, pp. 997–998). And within this guideline, APA (2007) accounts for unexpected departures: “In the case of the death or disability of the psychologist or of an unexpected transfer of the client’s care to another professional, current, accurate, and organized records allow for continuity of care” (p. 998). This forethought and active planning is congruent with the suggestion to create professional will (see aforementioned Legal Considerations section).
However, providers are also encouraged within Guideline 9: Electronic Records to use “passwords or encryption to protect confidential material” (APA, 2007, p. 1000). Thus, a provider may struggle to create a system that allows for swift and successful transfers of records amid unexpected departures, while also making earnest efforts to maintain privacy and security. For instance, if a provider uses Google’s G Suite (e.g., Google Drive/Docs), there is no current way to automatically transfer records to a new custodian upon an unexpected departure. Moreover, a correct username/e-mail and password (which could also be changed since included in the professional will) may be insufficient to login, as two-step verification may require an added token/credential that cannot be written in a professional will as they traditionally expire after 60 s.
Another challenge when using technology is related to the storage and deletion of obsolete records. The record keeping guidelines specifically addresses this concern in a couple sections. Guideline 7: Retention of Records suggests that notes and client information may be deleted 7 years after the last service delivery—absent superseding requirements (e.g., some insurers expect longer retention times). Although, records transferred to a third-party representative may not be maintained properly; while 7 years is considered a minimum window, a new custodian of digital records may struggle to decide what is an obsolete record or how much time has passed since a client’s last documented date of service. Moreover, Guideline 13: Disposition of Records shares methods for ridding obsolete records such as paper shredding and disposing/deleting information on hard drives. But a paucity of information is provided when dealing with EMRs or other record keeping systems, especially those managed by third-party companies.
Telepsychology Guidelines
The APA, Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), and The Trust (formerly, APA Insurance Trust) established a joint task force to establish guidelines for technology use in the provision of psychological services. The authors defined the scope of the publication and telepsychology as “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies” (JTF, 2013, p. 792). Example technologies (i.e., not an exhaustive list) are also noted in the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology: “telephone, mobile devices, interactive videoconferencing, e-mail, chat, text, and Internet (e.g., self-help websites, blogs, and social media)” (JTF, 2013, p. 792). In total, eight guidelines are offered to providers.
In particular, Disposal of Data and Information and Technologies: Guideline 6 is highly relevant to data after death. While the guideline advises providers to “securely dispose of software and hardware used in the provision of telepsychology services” and “carefully clean all the data and images in the storage media before reuse or disposal,” those who utilize third-party data storage offerings will not have any ability to verify these processes or hold companies to account for doing so (JTF, 2013, p. 798). In fact, data duplication processes that occur at data centers might make the deletion of any files permanently difficult to confirm. When responsibility for data management is shared—even with a trusted, HIPAA-compliant third-party company—a mental health provider might struggle to follow this guideline. Moreover, if a deletion plan is not established prior to an unexpected departure, data may be sustained in perpetuity (or life of the company).
Recommendations

In the event of an unexpected departure, mental health providers who have planned in advance for these moments may assist clients in continuity of care, autonomy over their records, maintenance and access to intended custodians, and better protect their privacy and confidentiality. Given the aforementioned legal and ethical considerations, providers would likely benefit from preparing in advance to ensure compliance. The following are six recommendations for practitioners:
Select a Custodian of Records
Proactive appointment of a colleague or privacy minded (e.g., trained in HIPAA compliance) custodian of client records in the event of unexpected provider departure is a meaningful direction toward protecting data (Cohen, 1983; Garcia-Lawson et al., 2000; McGee, 2003; O’Donnell, 2006). Neglecting to carefully select, communicate, and collaborate with a custodian confers risk to client confidentiality, as a lay individual (e.g., executor of will or surviving family member) who is unfamiliar with the profession’s record keeping ethical and legal standards may unintentionally expose PHI. Pope and Vasquez (2016) further suggest appointing secondary and tertiary custodians in the interest of redundancy. Alternatively, practitioners may elect to curate a team of colleagues to manage clinical records in the event of unexpected departure (Becher, Ogasawara, & Harris, 2012; Steiner, 2007). This process ought to be explicit and occur preferably in person to ensure that custodians know exactly where to find the necessary tools and information to appropriately manage records (Pope & Vasquez, 2016).
Include Policies in Informed Consent Documentation
Standard 3.10 Informed Consent of the APA (2017) Ethics Code states “Psychologists appropriately document written or oral consent, permission, and assent” regarding research endeavors, assessments, and therapy (p. 7). The rationale for informed consent is about providing clients with greater autonomy in their treatment decisions and is influenced by case law. As an example, Osheroff v. Chestnut Lodge (1985) was a notable case that deliberated the nature of informed consent in the field of mental health. In this Maryland state case, the plaintiff asserted that treatment options were not adequately provided, and as such, informed treatment decision making was not possible. Since then, research has emphasized the need to create, document, and continually follow informed consent procedures throughout treatment (e.g., Barnett, Wise, Johnson-Greene, & Bucky, 2007; Somberg, Stone, & Claiborn, 1993). Pope and Vasquez (2016) explain that informed consent should be considered a process—potentially revisited over time. Harm to clients may be reduced when providers inform clients about custodians, offer specific information about continuity of care, and share knowledge about the nature of services rendered by third parties. Clients should also be specifically informed about who the custodian(s) is/are to inhibit problematic conflicts of interest or multiple relationships where they may exist. For example, an additional portion within an informed consent document could read:
If clients are unable to reach this provider due to unforeseen circumstances or incapacitation, they may contact the professional representative(s) who will serve as a custodian of records. Additionally, this custodian of records will assist clients to transfer care to available providers, should this be desired.
Examine Retention Policies
The APA’s (2007) Record Keeping Guidelines outline various recommendations for notes, and establishes that after 7 years, providers may consider deleting obsolete records. Information retained beyond the point of use/relevance may threaten clients’ privacy and confidentiality (APA, 2007) and no longer be ethical if utilized (e.g., a new assessment should be conducted to establish cognitive functioning after years have passed since the original). Digital records and cloud storage solutions have come with a cost: Providers are no longer in complete control of their client records (i.e., sharing responsibility with third-party providers via BAAs). To delete a file entirely on a local hard drive involves: (a) locating the target file, (b) moving the file to the trash folder/bin, and (c) emptying the trash folder/bin. For the most thorough deletion processes on local drives, a provider may even reformat and reencrypt their drive to ensure a complete deletion of files (this will include anything on the drive). However, these processes have changed in the cloud. Destruction of records in these environments are more challenging and ambiguous (i.e., not typically detailed in company policies/terms). For instance, a popular psychological record keeping company, TherapyNotes (2018), writes “Information we collect may be retained indefinitely” (para. 7). This policy is somewhat consistent with third-party data storage companies such as Google, Dropbox, and Box. Each of these companies tend to engage in policies such as data duplication and various backups for redundancy, which prevent unintended data loss. Deleting a file may only make it invisible to the consumer and remain backed up. Thus, a provider’s autonomy in deleting files/records might be impacted, along with their ability to control obsolete records. Our recommendations are threefold: (a) ensure custodians are aware of what records should be deleted and when; (b) contact and contract with third-party providers about their retention/deletion policies; and (c) prepay (or include payment methods to the custodian), when possible, for subscription services (e.g., Google’s G Suite or TherapyNotes) to avoid lapses in billing and potential deletion of access.
Create a Digital, Professional Will
The development, maintenance, and storage of a professional will is necessary to properly manage risks and potential liability inherent to providing mental health services (Pope & Vasquez, 2016). Writing a professional will might be a complex, personal process in which mental health providers individually consider their circumstances and may benefit from consulting with a lawyer. Due to the nature of writing a professional will, we believe this article is not an appropriate outlet to outline the nuanced and provider-specific steps involved with this process. However, when writing a professional will we recommend that mental health providers consider the possibility of a potential unexpected departure and the related risks such a scenario creates.
To help mitigate these concerns, mental health providers should name a data custodian to receive appropriate PHI and access privileges; ideally, this individual would be a person who is ethical, trustworthy, competent, and familiar with the mandates associated with managing confidential patient data. Additionally, mental health care providers should work to ensure their professional will is secure and digitally available. In the event of an unexpected departure, a highly accessible professional will could help expedite necessary patient data retrievals, particularly in situations where the departed provider and identified data custodian live in different geographical regions and data access privileges are needed (e.g., passwords, usernames, or account authentications).
Utilize End-of-Life/Inactivity Features
Some services allow mental health providers to prepare for unexpected departures. Employing euphemisms for death and incapacitation, companies such as Google and TherapyNotes have the ability to place directives on their sites. For instance, Google (2020b) provides an “Inactive Account Manager,” which activates after a user-designated time period of inactivity (e.g., not logging on or using Google services) of 3, 6, 12, or 18 months. Additionally, the Manager allows for users to include trusted contacts and directions for data (e.g., delete everything if the period of inactivity occurs). TherapyNotes (2018) encourages providers to upload a professional will that is available to the company should a trusted custodian/third-party contact them for client records. Similarly, clinicians might consider using a password manager with built-in two-factor authentication tokens (e.g., 1Password, 2020) and end-of-life tools that allow for sharing accounts (including professional social media), passwords, and other important documents with trusted contacts (e.g., 1Password or LastPass). By sharing vital passwords for login, providers can assist clients via a custodian to access records and continue care elsewhere.
Secure Professional Liability/Malpractice Insurance
For many providers, professional liability coverage from insurers like The Trust or the American Professional Agency serves as a necessary component of providing high-quality, ethical mental health care by helping to effectively manage practice risks. For instance, alleged HIPAA violations relating to improper storage, maintenance, or retrieval of PHI could lead to legal action against a provider or their employer, and these risks are likely to be further complicated by the unexpected departure of a practitioner who hasn’t taken a priori risk management steps. We recommend that providers purchase an extended reporting period or tail as part of claims-made or another type of professional liability, preferably providing coverage in the event of death to maximize allotted time to receive risk management and ethics consultation services. Importantly, all licensed providers, nonlicensed practitioners, and student trainees who treat clients or patients should carefully consider their individual circumstances and secure a professional liability plan suited to their personal needs and preferences (Knapp, Youngggren, VandeCreek, Harris, & Martin, 2013).
Conclusions

Advancements in record keeping and other technologies directly and indirectly used for the provision of mental health care services have empowered clinicians to consider more cost-effective and efficient services. Progress has helped providers reduce risk for fire, flood, and other disasters that could destroy physical records. As additional providers embrace technology in psychology, the legal ramifications, ethical consequences, and guidelines for practice become ever more important. Moving from paper and pen to a keyboard and cloud-based EMRs is a transition that involves careful consideration for HIPAA and HITECH policies, as well.
Ultimately, clinicians are increasingly in situations where their notes are being maintained by other companies and entities. Keeping notes secure and private is an ethical and legal requirement (APA, 2007), and providers are encouraged to have strong passwords and consider two-factor authentication (e.g., Elhai & Hall, 2016; Lustgarten, 2015). Amid efforts to protect client data from unintended recipients, providers may inadvertently make records inaccessible to trusted custodians during unexpected departures. In an effort to alleviate grief, pain, and burdens that might be associated with the loss, providers should consider developing robust directives and outlines for trusted entities to read, review, and implement regarding data after death. To better protect clients and practices, we recommend providers select a competent custodian for records, place policies within informed consent documentation, examine retention policies of third-party companies, create a professional will, utilize end-of-life features, maintain awareness of both ethical and legal obligations, and to secure malpractice insurance. Collectively, these efforts should better manage federal and state policies, directives from the field, and other ethical concerns.
Privacy and security are vital components of today’s technology. For instance, Apple’s iOS smartphone devices operate securely, even in the face of government requests—necessitating the U.S. government to futilely ask the company to help them access information (Benner, 2020). However, when the devices and software are more secure, trusted custodians may have an ironically difficult time accessing information when needed. Today’s providers have more access to technology to ease their work than ever before, with greater responsibility to prepare for the unexpected. While individual psychologists and organizations can follow recommendations to maintain competence, systemic change within the technology sector and more finely delineated directives from federal and state governments are needed to better protect providers and the clients they serve.",
"21": "Introduction

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) represents the leading cause of death and disability in childhood. More than 600,000 children and adolescents are seen in emergency departments across the United States each year as a result of TBI, and early childhood and adolescence represents two peaks in TBI incidence across the life span (Taylor, Bell, Breiding, & Xu, 2017). Children and adolescents who have sustained a moderate to severe TBI are at risk of developing a range of psychological and physical health issues, including attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, learning disorders, and speech/language difficulties (Albicini & McKinlay, 2015; Bloom et al., 2001; Haarbauer-Krupa et al., 2018; Li & Liu, 2013; Max et al., 1997, 1998; Schwartz et al., 2003). Although children and adolescents with a moderate to severe TBI represent a pediatric population with heightened need for psychological services, many of their behavioral health needs are unmet (Karver et al., 2014). This is likely attributable in part to difficulties accessing specialized services or traditional in-office care resulting from injury-related barriers such as fatigue and motor problems, as well as general barriers to help-seeking such as living in rural areas (Ronzio, Guagliardo, & Persaud, 2006), lack of transportation, and lack of time.
In recent years, the advent of inexpensive videoconferencing programs, integrated web or phone cameras, and ever-expanding Internet access have made the possibility of delivering physical and behavioral health interventions via web-based platforms increasingly feasible and cost-effective. Indeed, telepsychology, that is, the “provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies,” such as with mobile devices, text messaging, and e-mail is a growing field (American Psychology Association, Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013). Telepsychology, and the broader use of telehealth to deliver both physical and behavioral health interventions, increases accessibility to care for a wide range of populations. For example, videoconferencing software enables families living in rural areas to engage in synchronous communication with a psychologist, without having to travel long distances to a primary care facility.
Telepsychology may be uniquely suited to the needs of children and families impacted by a range of pediatric concerns requiring rehabilitation care, including TBI. This is because children and families can access interventions from their home, and do not have to concern themselves with arranging child-care, or traveling with a child who may have health concerns, physical disabilities, and/or severe emotional or behavioral challenges. Although telepsychology may increase accessibility, telepsychology interventions with children and families impacted by pediatric conditions may pose unique difficulties such as challenges associated with the child’s developmental level, motor issues, behavioral challenges, as well as difficulties engaging multiple participants (i.e., parent/s and their children) without the psychologist being physically present (Slone, Reese, & McClellan, 2012). Moreover, conditions that impair attention and executive function skills (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and cognitive impairment attributable to TBI) may render telehealth approaches less effective than face-to-face treatment. Nonetheless, telehealth and telepsychology interventions have been increasingly used with a variety of pediatric populations such as children with traumatic brain injury, chronic pain, obesity, cancer, and encopresis (e.g., Davis, Sampilo, Gallagher, Landrum, & Malone, 2013; Palermo, Wilson, Peters, Lewandowski, & Somhegyi, 2009; Richardson, Frueh, Grubaugh, Egede, & Elhai, 2009; Ritterband et al., 2008; Van Allen, Davis, & Lassen, 2011; Wade et al., 2015).
Recognizing both the need for services and the barriers to care, Wade and colleagues have spent the past 15 years developing and testing web-based interventions for children/families impacted by pediatric TBI. The interventions and data regarding their efficacy are described in greater detail elsewhere (Antonini et al., 2014; Antonini, Raj, Oberjohn, & Wade, 2012; Wade et al., 2014; Wade et al., 2015; Wade, Walz, Carey, & Williams, 2008). In brief, these web-based interventions were delivered to children and adolescents with moderate to severe TBI and at least one of their caregivers. The intervention for younger children (ages 3 to 9 years), Internet-Interacting Together Everyday (I-InTERACT), was a positive parenting skills intervention in which parents learned positive parenting skills via web content and also received live coaching of these skills during weekly videoconference sessions with a clinician. The interventions for adolescents and their caregiver/s, Counselor Assisted Problem Solving (CAPS) and Teen Online Problem Solving (TOPS), provided training in problem-solving skills, self-regulation, and communication (Nezu & D’zurilla, 2006). Similar to I-InTERACT, families accessed information via web-content before weekly meetings with a clinician via synchronous videoconferencing to discuss, practice, and role-play skills. To bridge the digital divide and enable all families to participate (Calvert, Rideout, Woolard, Barr, & Strouse, 2005), families without existing home computers were provided with computers and web cameras, and all participants were reimbursed for high-speed Internet access for 6 months. Data collected since 2002 from families involved in these studies support the feasibility, acceptability, and efficacy of a telehealth treatment approach for children and families impacted by pediatric TBI (Antonini et al., 2012, 2014; Narad et al., 2015; Raj et al., 2015; Wade et al., 2008, 2012, 2014, 2015).
In additional studies with children and families impacted by pediatric TBI, there has been research supporting the efficacy of telepsychology interventions in improving child behavioral outcomes and supporting caregiver functioning in other pediatric populations (e.g., Palermo et al., 2009; Richardson et al., 2009; Slone et al., 2012; Van Allen, Davis, & Lassen, 2011). However, although the evidence base for telepsychology is increasing, little is known about clinician perceptions and experiences delivering telepsychology. One exception is a review of telemedicine in pediatric psychology by Van Allen and colleagues (2011), which included a summary of how telepsychology was delivered at a single site and anecdotal descriptions of clinician experiences and satisfaction. Clinicians at this site reported high satisfaction delivering telepsychology, though they also reported that very young children did not respond as well and that therapies which required a high level of interaction, such as play therapy, were less feasible via telehealth (Van Allen et al., 2011). More rigorous research with multiple sites is needed to gain a more cohesive understanding of clinician experiences and satisfaction delivering telepsychology.
Clinician perceptions delivering telepsychology are also important because this feedback can help determine profiles of children/families who may be more likely to benefit from one intervention modality over another (e.g., a better fit with an in-office intervention vs. telepsychology). In addition, clinician perspectives regarding advantages and challenges can inform intervention delivery and serve to improve both client and clinician satisfaction. Finally, feedback from clinicians who have delivered in-office and web-based interventions can help determine qualities of clinicians who may find one modality more effective and satisfying than the other. The broad aim of this study was to explore and describe clinician experiences delivering telehealth interventions to children/families impacted by pediatric TBI as part of a number of research studies. Satisfaction data from families who participated in these studies have been largely positive, with parents reporting high levels of satisfaction with the intervention and online delivery format (Antonini et al., 2012; Wade, Walz, Carey, & Williams, 2009; Wade, Wolfe, & Pestian, 2004). However, little is known about clinician experiences and perceptions of advantages and disadvantages of using telehealth over the traditional in-office, face-to-face treatment format. To broaden stakeholder input, we invited all clinicians who had delivered online therapies for pediatric TBI in past and present interventions to participate in this study. In addition to clinician experiences, we were interested in gaining clinician perceptions of advantages and limitations of telepsychology treatments for children and families impacted by pediatric TBI. We also sought to understand clinician perspectives on the family and clinician factors that supported the utility and efficacy of telepsychology for pediatric TBI. We expected clinicians to report online delivery to be similar to face-to-face on most dimensions examined, with some areas where online delivery is favorable and others where face-to-face delivery is preferable.
Method

Participants
Clinicians, including licensed psychologists, psychology fellows, and advanced doctoral students, who delivered telepsychology interventions to children/adolescents and families impacted by pediatric TBI as part of a series of eight clinical trials were invited to participate. These trials took place between 2002 and 2017, and were conducted at six large tertiary care hospitals in Colorado, Minnesota, and Ohio. Demographic characteristics of these families varied widely by parental education, income, and urban versus rural place of residence (Antonini et al., 2014; Wade et al., 2017, 2018). Six of these trials involved family centered cognitive–behavioral therapy with the child, ages 11–19, one or both parents, and siblings when possible. Sessions focused on helping the child and family to cope more effectively with the challenges they were facing. In these studies, time since injury ranged from 0–24 months. Two trials involved parent skills training with live coaching and included the child ages 3–9, and one or both parents. This treatment focused on the parent’s interaction with the child. For both treatments, sessions were held weekly to biweekly for a period of four to six months. All but three of the therapists delivered both treatments. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the primary hospital where the intervention studies were based. The interventions were delivered using varying videoconferencing platforms over the years, including Polycom Viavideo, Skype, Movi, and Facetime, and most sessions conducted after 2006 were delivered via Skype.
All previous and current clinicians (n = 17) were invited to participate. Of those, three either failed to respond to the request or were unable to be contacted, resulting in a participation rate of 76% (n = 13) for the surveys and 82% (n = 14) for the focus groups/key-informant interviews (one clinician who participated in the key-informant interview did not complete a survey). At the time of treatment delivery, six of the clinicians were licensed psychologists, one was an unlicensed psychology postdoctoral fellow, and seven were advanced clinical psychology graduate students. At the time of the present study, 10 were licensed psychologists and four were unlicensed postdoctoral fellows in clinical psychology. When the surveys and interviews were conducted, six clinicians were actively delivering both face-to-face and telehealth interventions to adolescents with TBI, and time since delivery of the treatment protocol and the present study for the remaining clinicians ranged from 1 to 5 years. A few clinicians (n = 2) had previously delivered phone-based interventions, but most clinicians had not delivered telepsychology interventions before working on these clinical trials. Clinicians who participated in this study delivered the telepsychology interventions described above to between 14 and upward of 50 children/adolescents and families. All but one clinician were female.
Measures
Telepsychology survey
Participants completed a survey comparing telepsychology (delivered via synchronous videoconferencing) to face-to-face therapy on 16 dimensions commonly addressed in psychotherapy research (e.g., therapeutic alliance, reading nonverbal cues, family motivation, clinician engagement, etc.; see Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Clinician Ratings of Telepsychology Versus Face-to-Face Treatments
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
for a complete list). The survey was developed by the research team to capture a range of factors salient to the delivery and experiences of clinicians providing psychotherapy to children/adolescents and families. Participants were asked to rate each item on a 5-point scale with the options ranging from 1 = face-to-face much better than online; 2 = face-to-face somewhat better than online; 3 = face-to-face and online about the same; 4 = online somewhat better than face-to-face; to 5 = online much better than face-to-face. To facilitate interpretation, responses were collapsed into the following three categories: (a) face-to-face better than online (survey score of 1 or 2); (b) face-to-face equivalent to online (survey score of 3); and (c) online better than face-to-face (survey score of 4 or 5). In addition to ratings, each item was followed by a space for comments where participants were encouraged to qualify their responses. This open-ended feedback was analyzed together with the focus group and key-informant interview data described below.
Focus group/interviews
In addition to completing surveys, clinicians were invited to participate in one of two focus groups, and those who were unable to attend either of the focus groups completed a key informant interview covering similar content. The aims of the focus groups/interviews were to gain a richer understanding of clinician experiences and to provide context and detail to survey responses. The research team developed a semistructured interview protocol for the focus groups/interviews which included open-ended questions and prompts (e.g., “Describe your experience delivering telepsychology interventions”; “What are the advantages/disadvantages you perceive between delivering behavioral health interventions via telepsychology vs. face-to-face?”; and “Think about families you have worked with, identify qualities of families that you feel are poised to benefit more from web-based interventions over face-to-face sessions, and vice versa”). Nine clinicians participated in the focus groups (five in the first, four in the second), and the remaining five clinicians completed key informant interviews using the same semistructured protocol as the focus groups. All focus groups and interviews were led by a licensed clinical psychologist who was also the primary supervisor on the research studies. In addition, two postdoctoral fellows in clinical psychology helped facilitate the focus groups. Handwritten notes were made by the facilitator and both postdoctoral fellows during the focus groups and the facilitator took notes during the one-on-one interviews. Efforts were made to transcribe responses verbatim.
Analyses
This mixed-methods study utilized a sequential explanatory design (Creswell, 2013), whereby data collection and analyses were conducted in two stages. In the first stage, descriptive statistics were used to analyze the quantitative results from the surveys. In the second stage, qualitative data were gathered to qualify quantitative data and to provide a richer understanding of responses and findings. Qualitative data were examined using qualitative content analysis, which is a widely used approach in social science research (Zhang & Wildemuth, 2009). Given that the aim of the qualitative data was to expand and explain quantitate findings, a directed content analysis approach was used (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Consistent with this approach, the focus group/interview protocol included broad open-ended questions, as well as targeted questions that were guided by the quantitative responses of informants.
Qualitative data analysis began with the research team reviewing open-ended responses to the surveys and reading notes from the focus groups/informant interviews. Responses were coded during group meetings by the team as a whole using some predetermined codes (e.g., ease of scheduling, technical difficulties), and new codes that emerged were duly added to relevant categories/clusters. Efforts to enhance trustworthiness of findings included regular “on the spot” member checks during interviews (i.e., clarifying what participants said). In addition, analysis was conducted by the entire team of researchers, all of whom have familiarity with telepsychology interventions. This team approach, and reliance on group consensus, helped minimize the effects of individual bias and preferences. When there were discrepant opinions about codes/themes, the researchers discussed and negotiated until they reached agreement. The high response rate helped minimize bias and provided the opportunity for a range of responses, as respondents included those who delivered telepsychology interventions when these interventions were still novel (i.e., more than 10 years ago) and those currently delivering telepsychology. Finally, details of the participants and the telepsychology interventions are provided throughout the results to give context to the findings and to aid readers in determining how transferable and generalizable findings are to other telepsychology interventions.
Results

We begin by presenting results from the surveys (also see Table 1); specifically, a count of clinicians who rated a survey item as being either better, similar, or worse between telepsychology and face-to-face interventions. We then elaborate on these findings with qualitative responses in the interviews. We also summarize additional themes that emerged from the focus groups/interviews (see Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Qualitative Feedback on Advantages and Disadvantages of Telepsychology Interventions and Characteristics of Families Likely to Benefit From Telepsychology Versus Face-to-Face Treatment
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Content reported in quotes represents verbatim responses from one or more participants.
Dimensions Where Telepsychology Is Favorable to Face-to-Face Intervention
The greatest advantage of online delivery versus face-to-face reported was an increased understanding of the home environment (85% of respondents). In the interviews, clinicians described how telepsychology interventions delivered in the home enabled the clinician to “see the family in their natural environment and all the factors that were contributing to family dynamics and issues.” This provided “greater ecological validity” and enabled the clinician to intervene in vivo and to develop/problem-solve strategies that were pertinent to the family’s lived experience in the home. Another advantage of online interventions included less caregiver stigma/negative attitudes toward treatment (62%), as families seemed to perceive online interventions as “less threatening” than attending a face-to-face sessions. In particular, clinicians reported that telepsychology was less stigmatizing and superior for engaging adolescents and promoting participation from fathers and siblings.
Clinicians also rated telepsychology as offering greater ease of scheduling (54%). Clinicians reported that an online delivery afforded more flexibility with regard to their own schedules. For example, clinicians reported that they could offer evening hours and could deliver the intervention from their home office, which was convenient for them, and increased accessibility for families. In addition, clinicians described how an online delivery made it easier for families who lived far away from treatment centers to receive interventions, and reduced financial burden on families related to travel, transportation, and childcare costs for siblings not participating in the intervention, when applicable.
Dimensions Where Telepsychology Is Equivalent to Face-to-Face Intervention
Clinicians rated most dimensions assessed (11 of 17) as being equivalent between telepsychology and face-to-face. For example, therapeutic alliance was rated as equivalent to face-to-face interventions (85%). In describing their experiences, clinicians reported feeling “skeptical about how the rapport would be (prior to delivering online interventions)” and some remarked feeling “extremely pleased” or “pleasantly surprised to see warmth and rapport were consistent (with face-to-face interventions).” Although most clinician reported no difference in establishing rapport (54%), most reported in the interviews that there were additional skills “needed to make those connections and establish rapport” when delivering interventions via telepsychology. Clinicians reported that this was something “you learn as you do telepsychology.” Extending from this, although most clinicians reported similar levels of clinician engagement (70%), 30% of clinicians reported experiencing less engagement when delivering telepsychology. In describing this during the interviews, some clinicians reported having to work harder to deliver telepsychology, as they needed to be cognizant of multiple factors, such as, technological aspects of the intervention, attending to nonverbal communication, and addressing disruptions during sessions.
Other dimensions that were rated similarly included completion of homework (77%), as well as parent (85%) and child engagement (70%). Most clinicians rated attendance as being similar (54%) and some rated attendance in telepsychology to be superior (31%). In the focus groups, some clinicians reported that families tended to reschedule online appointments more often than face-to-face sessions, given the perceived flexibility; though attendance was reportedly similar. Overall, clinicians felt that family attendance was “more to do with family functioning than the type of intervention modality.” They expressed the belief that families who struggled with attendance for online interventions would likely have also had attendance problems for in-person interventions and vice versa.
Dimensions Where Face-to-Face Intervention Is Superior to Telepsychology
The greatest disadvantage clinicians reported of telepsychology relative to face-to-face interventions was amount of disruptions during session (92%). For example, clinicians reported online sessions being disrupted by “people or pets walking in,” “multiple kids’ demanding caregiver attention,” as well as other household-related issues such as needing to attend to food on the stove. In essence, by delivering telepsychology to families in their home, both families and clinicians had to contend with other household demands/distractions. Although part of the training and clinician manual for these telepsychology interventions addressed setting boundaries around home-based sessions and problem-solving with families to minimize distractions, this issue remained a challenge for clinicians.
Another disadvantage was reading nonverbal communication (70%). Reading nonverbal cues was reported to be particularly difficult in family treatment when there were more family members participating, as not everyone’s face would be clearly in view on the screen. In addition, the emotional climate and family tension were also noted as more difficult to read via telehealth than face-to-face. The other greatest disadvantage of telepsychology was technical/logistical challenges (85%). In the interviews, clinicians reported that there were some families who struggled with the technological aspects of the interventions, and assisting with these issues posed an additional burden on the clinician. A few clinicians expressed the view that managing technical challenges during a session was a good opportunity for clinicians to model positive problem-solving skills. All clinicians expressed the belief that technological problems are becoming less of a challenge, as families are becoming more technologically savvy and web-technology is advancing and becoming easier to navigate. However, clinicians felt that even with these advances, there would remain a subset of families who are uncomfortable with technology and would prefer face-to-face interventions.
Clinician Perceptions of Families Who Benefit Most From Telepsychology
There were a number of family factors that clinicians consistently identified as impacting a family’s likelihood of benefiting from an online delivery more than face-to-face. Families living in rural areas or those requiring transportation to a treatment facility were identified as a population most likely to benefit, as these families would struggle to access traditional in-office care. In addition, families with fewer resources or complicated schedules (e.g., working parents, having many children in the home, families managing many injury-related appointments, etc.) were also identified as more suited to online interventions. In contrast, families living in large households or those in homes where there is no suitable private space to participate in telepsychology sessions, may be less able to benefit from online interventions.
Several clinicians noted that cognitive and attention issues, which are common following TBI, sometimes posed challenges during telepsychology sessions. Specifically, clinicians reported difficulty maintaining child attention and engagement. Expanding on this, clinicians felt that they needed to work harder to engage this population of patients, compared to those without attention issues. It should be noted that therapists also expressed that they would need to provide greater structure whether the session was delivered online or in-person; however, many of the strategies used to provide structure for children or adolescents with cognitive impairments and/or challenging behavior during in-person sessions needed to be adapted for use during telehealth. Adolescents who were quiet or reluctant to engage in treatment were also noted as posing challenges, although some clinicians noted that this would be true regardless of the treatment modality. Conversely, some clinicians thought that being online and in their home environment mitigated resistance to treatment for some adolescents. A number of clinicians noted similar challenges with attention and engagement during telepsychology sessions for parents as well.
Clinician Perceptions of Clinician Qualities That Support Telepsychology Delivery
Clinicians identified a number of clinician qualities which they believed facilitated online delivery, such as flexibility and comfort addressing disruptions. For example, clinicians reported that they needed to feel comfortable checking-in with families about distractions in the home that may be impacting the session (e.g., “Who is behind the computer?” or “What are you looking at?”). Clinicians also felt that an online delivery required clinicians to be comfortable taking a more didactic role with families and feeling at-ease “teaching families” about technological aspects of the intervention and trouble-shooting technological issues. Other clinician qualities that were suited to telepsychology delivery included feeling confidence in the efficacy of telepsychology interventions, being “able to read the situation,” and the ability to anticipate and problem-solve challenges that may arise. As for qualities of clinicians that would be less suited to deliver telepsychology treatments, a number of clinicians reported that telepsychology interventions could be less intimate than face-to-face sessions, and clinicians who valued the intimacy of being in the same physical space may be less suited to telepsychology.
Discussion

This mixed-methods study elucidated several advantages and disadvantages of utilizing telepsychology in comparison to face-to-face therapy for family-centered treatment of pediatric TBI from a clinician perspective. Overall, clinicians reported that telepsychology was superior to face-to-face therapy in terms of scheduling/attendance, understanding the family and home environments, and reducing behavioral health stigma. Although some clinicians commented that establishing therapeutic alliance via telepsychology could be challenging and require unique clinical skills, a majority of clinicians reported that establishing therapeutic alliance was equivalent between online and face-to-face sessions. This is consistent with past research with parents who have reported comparable levels of therapeutic alliance between web-delivered therapy and face-to-face therapy (Backhaus et al., 2012; Lingely-Pottie & McGrath, 2006). Clinicians reported several challenges with utilizing telepsychology; the most prominent including distractions and reading nonverbal cues. In addition, technological issues invariably arose from time to time. However, clinicians reported that problem-solving around these challenges was an effective opportunity to model and practice skills in vivo. Given that a subset of families were not native technology users and were provided with unfamiliar computer equipment to support their participation, these challenges are likely heightened relative to telepsychology with computer-savvy families.
Clinicians also identified several clinician and family characteristics that facilitated telepsychology. Clinicians believed that families who lived in rural areas and with low resources were most likely to benefit, whereas families with more chaotic home environments without a private space for teleconferencing would be less likely to benefit. Previous studies suggest that rural families may be ideal candidates for telepsychology, particularly because of federal initiatives to provide inexpensive Internet access in these areas (Nelson & Bui, 2010). Additionally, low-income families, in contrast to high-income families, were most likely to benefit from an online parenting skills training intervention for pediatric TBI (Raj et al., 2015). However, lower income families and caregivers with a lower education were also less likely to complete a web-based family problem-solving intervention (Blaha et al., 2015). Taken together, these findings suggest that families in more unstable/chaotic homes who likely need the most help may have the greatest difficulty finding the time and resources to participate in both telepsychology and face-to-face interventions. In this regard, clinicians underscored the importance of being flexible in response to family challenges and being assertive in establishing appropriate boundaries.
Clinician perceptions can better be understood in the context of the parent’s satisfaction with the videoconference-based treatment sessions. Previous reports suggest that satisfaction with the teletherapy was consistently high, albeit with a minority of families preferring face-to-face treatment. In the initial study (Wade, Carey, & Wolfe, 2006), 100% of parents rated the sessions as moderately to extremely helpful, with approximately 80% rating them as moderately to extremely helpful relative to face-to-face treatment. In a subsequent trial (Wade et al., 2014), 96% rated the videoconferences as helpful overall, with 85% rating them as very or extremely helpful. Similarly, parent satisfaction ratings for the parent-skills coaching intervention indicated that 87% found the sessions helpful relative to traditional in-person treatment (Antonini et al., 2012). Comparisons of adolescent satisfaction among those who participated with their parents versus independently (Wade et al., 2017) also noted high levels of satisfaction with the videoconferences among the adolescents themselves. Although not possible in the current project, future research would benefit from understanding the characteristics of families and children who preferred face-to-face treatment and the extent to which those characteristics dovetailed with the therapist’s perspectives.
The current findings must be understood in the context of the study’s limitations, which include a relatively small sample of predominantly female clinicians who were specifically hired to conduct telepsychology, and thus may not be representative of the broader population of psychologists. It is possible that male clinicians may have yielded different insights regard the merits and disadvantages of telehealth with this population. Moreover, only six clinicians had the experience of delivering the same treatment in both face-to-face and online modalities, and the other clinicians relied on comparisons of the telehealth interventions to similar face-to-face treatments. Unfortunately, there are few randomized, controlled trials directly comparing telepsychology and face-to-face interventions for children and families, in comparison with the adult literature (Slone et al., 2012). Such head-to-head trials can ultimately identify who is most likely to benefit from each modality. We did not assess the therapist’s theoretical orientation and thus were unable to examine its influence on their perceptions of telehealth. Time since delivering the telehealth interventions varied considerably, and recall may have been biased by the passage of time. Additionally, improved teleconferencing capabilities may have mitigated some of the earlier concerns. Another limitation of this project includes notetaking, as opposed to audio recording the focus groups and interviews. Three separate individuals took notes during the focus groups as a means of reducing the limitation of this methodology. An additional limitation is that the focus groups and interviews were conducted by the psychologist who provided supervision for the telehealth treatments, which could have contributed to participant reluctance to express criticism of telepsychology. However, the therapist surveys were de-identified, and the request to complete the survey came from a coauthor (rather than the supervising psychologist). In addition, clinicians were encouraged to be as honest as possible regarding their experiences, and a team approach was undertaken to analyze the results. Findings from the therapist survey and focus group/interviews were consistent suggesting that the noted limitations had minimal impact on reported information. A number of the limitations of this study are reflective of the current status of telepsychology, in that this is a growing field. This study focused on the delivery of telepsychology to a distinct pediatric rehabilitation population, and studies with larger samples of psychologists and pediatric populations are needed.
There are several challenges regarding continued research and dissemination in the area of telepsychology, including ethical considerations regarding confidentiality and online security, as well as ensuring participant’s safety regarding suicidality concerns/threats (see guidance in Henderson, Law, Palermo, & Eccleston, 2012). Additionally, there are special considerations when treating children and families with telepsychology, including modifications based on developmental status and the level of family involvement (Hilty et al., 2016). Finally, telepsychology poses several issues in terms of dissemination in typical clinical practice, including reimbursement and requirements regarding licensure in multiple states. Overall, clinicians in this study have expressed high satisfaction with the application of telepsychology with children and families, which indicates promise for the acceptance and dissemination of telepsychology more widely.
In closing, findings from this study provide an important foundation for future investigations examining the merits of telepsychology versus traditional treatment for pediatric populations. Future research could examine cost effectiveness, as well as the role that clinician and patient perceptions of telepsychology play in adherence and attrition. It may also be helpful to direct future research toward a better description of the specific clinician factors and process variables (e.g., therapeutic alliance, adherence, etc.) that facilitate rapport during telepsychology treatment. This information would be helpful for the development of training for future clinicians utilizing telepsychology to optimize treatment efficacy.",
"22": "The use of information and communication technologies has emerged as the next big frontier in the efficient and effective delivery of health care. The term “telemedicine” has been adopted to describe health care delivery via technology (Wilson & Maeder, 2015), including in mental health treatment delivery, where it is typically known as telepsychology. Telepsychology, the delivery of psychological services via technology, is a broad field and encompasses various delivery modalities and formats (Nelson, Bui, & Velasquez, 2011). It needs to be distinguished from other forms of telemedicine, such as telepsychiatry, which further includes the delivery of psychopharmacological interventions via technology. The various delivery modalities and formats include the use of mobile phone technology (e.g., short message service or application-based interventions), telephone-delivered therapy, video teleconferencing, Internet-delivered text-based therapy or treatment programs, and other formats such as using social media or video games as adjuncts to therapy. While these delivery formats vary in their specifics, such as being self-directed, guided self-help, or real-time interaction with a specialist, all are accessible to individuals with Internet and/or phone service and suitable equipment.
An important distinction in telepsychology is between “synchronous” and “asynchronous” delivery methods (Wilson & Maeder, 2015). Synchronous telepsychology refers to visual and/or auditory interactions between the client and provider that are in real time and is therefore the most similar delivery format to traditional in-person treatment (Osenbach, O’Brien, Mishkind, & Smolenski, 2013). Synchronous interventions include telephone or video teleconference (VTC)–delivered treatments and Internet-delivered text-based treatments that involve real-time text interactions (often referred to as “webchat”). Asynchronous telepsychology involves client–provider interactions that are not in real time and thus includes interventions such as automated Internet or computer-based interventions or e-mail interactions with providers (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2015).
Telepsychology is of particular relevance in countries that face geographical challenges in delivering health care (Mehrotra et al., 2016). Research shows that increasing location remoteness was consistently associated with lower service use, and this relationship was particularly strong for specialist mental health interventions (Meadows, Enticott, Inder, Russell, & Gurr, 2015). There is even further restriction on the availability of providers who specialize in the treatment of particularly complex mental health conditions, such as posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), in regional and remote areas (Frueh, 2015; Riding-Malon & Werth, 2014). Research suggests that common barriers to seeking or receiving mental health treatment in rural or remote areas include concerns about stigma (Wrigley, Jackson, Judd, & Komiti, 2005), geographical isolation, difficulty accessing appropriate transport, concerns about the cost of treatment, and perceived time commitment (Handley et al., 2014). Certain populations of treatment seekers may be particularly vulnerable to perceptions of stigma relating to mental health, as well as being rurally located, such as veterans (Frueh, 2015). Accessing treatment via telepsychology may reduce concerns about stigma, with treatment available in the privacy of one’s own home, which provides flexibility and allows optimum use of client and therapist time (Rees & Haythornthwaite, 2004).
Evidence for the effectiveness of telepsychology has been emerging over the past decade. Systematic reviews that have combined both types of telepsychology, that is, synchronous and nonsynchronous, indicate that telepsychology is generally effective (Backhaus et al., 2012). However, previous reviews have included several different telepsychology modalities, with Internet based, computer based, telephone based, and video based included, together without examining or commenting on the difference between synchronous and nonsynchronous treatments. Synchronous treatment is the most similar treatment to traditional psychological treatments and therefore seems to be the logical place to start, to further our understanding of telepsychology. Common types of synchronous treatment include telephone-delivered, VTC-delivered, and Internet-delivered text-based modalities. It has been noted in the literature that these heterogeneous modalities are commonly grouped together (Osenbach et al., 2013), but it is important to explore whether there is differential evidence supporting each of these modalities. There has been only one previous systematic literature review that has focused specifically on synchronous telepsychology for the treatment of depression (Osenbach et al., 2013), and it concluded that it was as effective as nontelehealth means in reducing depression symptoms. In comparison, no literature reviews have assessed the evidence in relation to synchronous telepsychology for other common mental health conditions such as anxiety, PTSD, and adjustment disorder. It is important to develop an understanding of how effective synchronous telepsychology is likely to be for these disorders, as people experiencing these disorders are often geographically isolated, experiencing stigma, or experiencing physical injury. Another common mental health problem, substance abuse, has been the subject of several telepsychology reviews over the past few years (e.g., Benavides-Vaello, Strode, & Sheeran, 2013; Young, 2012) and as such will not be examined in the current review.
The aim of this review is to determine the efficacy of synchronous telepsychology for the treatment of three common mental health disorders (anxiety, PTSD, and adjustment disorder) that have not yet been investigated through systematic review, in addition to updating the literature on synchronous telepsychology for the treatment of depression beyond the findings from Osenbach and colleagues (Osenbach et al., 2013). Given that the study focus is heterogeneous in respect to modality (all forms of synchronous telepsychology) and disorder (anxiety, PTSD, adjustment disorder, and depression), and given that telepsychology is a rapidly developing field, it is well suited to a rapid evidence assessment (REA) approach as opposed to a systematic review.
Method

This study utilized an REA methodology, which is a rigorous process that avoids a number of the challenges that face a systematic review, such as the time and resource cost (Crawford, Boyd, Jain, Khorsan, & Jonas, 2015; Varker et al., 2015). The key limitations of an REA methodology come from the restricted search period and the exclusion of unpublished, difficult-to-obtain, and/or foreign language studies (Varker et al., 2015). The steps of an REA methodology are outlined below.
Defining the Question
The first stage of the REA is defining the population, intervention, comparison, and outcome (PICO), in the same manner as a systematic review (Crawford et al., 2015). The population of interest was defined as adults with a diagnosis of depression, anxiety, PTSD, or adjustment disorder (ascertained by diagnosis or cutoff score on a validated measure). The intervention was defined as any psychological intervention delivered using synchronous telepsychology. The comparison included studies with treatment as usual (TAU), in-person treatments, or alternative telepsychology intervention comparisons. The outcome was defined as change in mental health symptom severity.
Search Strategy
Medline, PsycINFO, and the Cochrane library were searched for peer-reviewed literature published from January 2005 to July 2016. Each database was single searched using the title(s), abstract(s), MeSH terms, and keywords lists with search terms specific to telepsychology, common mental health conditions (i.e., depression, PTSD, adjustment disorder, and anxiety), and study type. The interventions that were searched for were those that are typically used in the treatment of depression, PTSD, adjustment disorder, and anxiety. The following search terms were used: “major depressive disorder” OR depression OR PTSD OR “posttraumatic stress” OR “post-traumatic stress” OR “traumatic stress” OR “stress disorder” OR anxiety OR “GAD” OR “generali*ed anxiety disorder” OR “anxiety disorder” OR phobia OR panic OR “adjustment disorder” AND “cognitive behavioral therapy” OR “cognitive behavioral therapy” OR CBT OR “cognitive processing therapy” OR “cognitive therapy” OR “dialectical behavior therapy” OR “dialectical behavior therapy” OR “behavior therapy” OR “behavior therapy” OR exposure OR “imaginal exposure” OR “in vivo exposure” OR “motivational interviewing” OR “acceptance and commitment therapy” OR “mindfulness” OR “schema therapy” OR “interpersonal therapy” OR EMDR OR “eye movement desensitization and reprocessing” OR “narrative therapy” OR “solution focused therapy” OR “solution focused therapy” OR “psychiatric consultation” OR therapy OR treatment OR counseling OR intervention AND telepsychology, OR telemedicine, OR e-health, OR telehealth, OR telephone, OR “mobile phone” OR video, OR videoconferencing, OR skype, OR face-time, OR Internet, OR online, OR web, OR web-based, OR Internet-based OR Internet-delivered OR telephone-based OR telephone-delivered OR web-delivered AND “systematic review” OR “meta-analysis” OR RCT OR “randomi*ed controlled trial” OR “control trial” OR “effectiveness trial” OR “control study” OR “clinical trial.”
Study Selection
Studies were included if they were published in English; were peer-reviewed meta-analyses, systematic reviews, or randomized controlled trials (RCTs); involved adults (≥ 18 years of age); used psychological interventions delivered by synchronous telepsychology; included participants with a diagnosis or cutoff score indicating an anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder, PTSD, or adjustment disorder; and where trial outcomes included mental health symptom severity. Studies were excluded where asynchronous telepsychology modalities were used. One author (R.M.B.) initially screened the studies based on title and abstract and obtained the full-text papers that satisfied the inclusion criteria. The full-text papers were then screened for inclusion, with 10% of these randomly selected and checked by a second author (T.V.) for agreement. This meant that these papers were reviewed by the second author for eligibility as per the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Of the 10% checked by both reviewers, there was 100% interrater agreement. Any disagreements between reviewers would have been resolved by discussion or through adjudication by a third author (A.P.). If a meta-analysis selected for inclusion in the REA included a study that was also found as an independent article, then the individual study was not included or counted for the purposes of the current review and was only reported on as part of the meta-analysis.
Quality Assessment
The quality of included research studies was appraised using the criteria from the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) checklist (NHMRC, 1999), which considers the following four study features: the method of treatment assignment (i.e., correct blinding and randomization), control of selection bias (i.e., intention to treat and dropout rate), blinding of outcome assessor, and whether standardized assessment was used. The quality of systematic reviews and meta-analyses was assessed using NHMRC quality criteria (NHMRC, 2000), which consider the adequacy of the search strategy, appropriateness of the inclusion criteria, presence of quality assessment for individual studies, summary of the results of individual studies, and quantitative synthesis of results (where relevant). An overall rating of the quality of each study is provided in Table 2.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Research Evaluating the Effectiveness of Synchronous Telemedicine-Delivered Psychological Interventions for Clients With High-Prevalence Mental Health Conditions
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
The results of these quality assessments were then used to inform the overall strength of the evidence.
Ranking the Overall Evidence
The evidence was evaluated using five criteria (Merlin, Weston, & Tooher, 2009): the strength of the evidence, in terms of the quality, quantity, and design of the included studies; the direction of the findings; the consistency of the findings across the included studies (including across a range of study populations and study designs); and the generalizability (of the body of evidence to the target population) and applicability of the findings to the population of interest, as defined by the PICO. Three independent raters (R.M.B., T.V., and J.W.) made ratings about the strength of the evidence, direction of the findings, consistency of the findings, generalizability, and applicability. Strength of the evidence was based on the following categories: high strength, where there is one or more systematic review or meta-analysis of RCTs with a low risk of bias (i.e., risk of there being a systematic error in the results, which can lead to underestimation or overestimation of the true intervention effect), or three or more RCTs with a low risk of bias; moderate strength, where there is one or two RCTs with a low risk of bias; and low strength, where there is one or more RCT with a high risk of bias. The direction of the findings was judged in terms of whether the weight of the evidence showed positive results, unclear results (i.e., no significant effects or mixed results), or negative results. Further details on the methods for making each of these judgments for each of the five criteria are detailed in Varker et al. (2015).
The strength of the evidence, the direction of the findings, and the consistency of the findings reflect the internal validity of the findings in support of efficacy for an intervention. The last two components considered the external factors that may influence effectiveness. On the basis of these five factors, the total body of the evidence was then ranked into one of four categories: “Supported,” “Promising,” “Unknown,” and “Not Supported.” A ranking of “Supported” means that there is clear, consistent evidence of a beneficial effect with no evidence suggesting a negative or harmful effect. “Promising” means that the evidence is suggestive of a beneficial effect but further information is required. An “Unknown” ranking means that there is insufficient evidence of a beneficial effect and further research is required, and “Not Supported” means there is clear, consistent evidence of no effect or negative/harmful effect (Varker et al., 2015). Agreement on ranking was sought between three independent raters (T.V., R.M.B., and J.W.), with 100% interrater agreement found. Discrepancies between the raters would have been resolved through discussion.
Results

Figure 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Flowchart of search for studies.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
shows the yield at all stages of the review. After removing duplicate articles from an initial yield of 2,266 articles, 2,196 articles were screened on title and abstract and 206 were deemed eligible for full-text review. After the full-text review stage, 24 articles were deemed eligible for inclusion. Given the relatively small number of articles identified in the REA, the studies were grouped by telepsychology modality to provide the most meaningful results possible, regardless of the mental health disorder addressed in the study.
Of the 24 articles included in the review, 8 studies (Brenes, Danhauer, Lyles, Hogan, & Miller, 2015; Dwight-Johnson et al., 2011; Gellis, Kenaley, & Have, 2014; Lovell et al., 2006; Ludman, Simon, Tutty, & Von Korff, 2007; Mohr, Carmody, Erickson, Jin, & Leader, 2011; Mohr et al., 2005, 2012) and 1 meta-analysis (Mohr, Vella, Hart, Heckman, & Simon, 2008) investigated the effectiveness of telephone-delivered interventions for depression; 10 studies (Acierno et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2014; Egede et al., 2015; Fortney et al., 2015; Morland et al., 2014, 2015; Stubbings, Rees, Roberts, & Kane, 2013; Vogel et al., 2014; Yuen et al., 2015; Ziemba et al., 2014) and 1 systematic review, which included 20 studies (Rees & Maclaine, 2015), investigated the effectiveness of VTC-delivered interventions for anxiety disorders; 2 further studies investigated Internet-delivered text-based interventions (Kessler et al., 2009; Kramer, Conijn, Oijevaar, & Riper, 2014); and 1 meta-analysis (Osenbach et al., 2013) investigated the effectiveness of multiple telepsychology modalities in the treatment of depression, while another meta-analysis investigated the effectiveness of multiple telepsychology modalities in the treatment of mood or functional mental health problems (Bee et al., 2008). The majority of the studies were conducted in the United States (n = 15), with studies also conducted in Europe (n = 4) and Australia (n = 1). A summary of the key characteristics of the included studies is described below and presented in Table 1.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Characteristics of the Studies Investigating Synchronous Telepsychology Interventions
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
The overall findings for each intervention type are presented below and in Table 2.
Telephone-Delivered Interventions
Overall, 11 studies investigated the effectiveness of telephone-delivered psychological interventions. Two meta-analyses looked at a range of telepsychology modalities, including telephone-delivered therapy (Bee et al., 2008; Osenbach et al., 2013), while a third meta-analysis looked specifically at telephone-delivered psychotherapy for depression (Mohr et al., 2008). Eight individual RCTs assessed telephone-delivered therapy for a range of disorders (i.e., generalized anxiety disorder, depression, and obsessive–compulsive disorder), with TAU comparisons (Dwight-Johnson et al., 2011; Gellis et al., 2014; Ludman et al., 2007; Mohr et al., 2011), in-person therapy comparisons (Lovell et al., 2006; Mohr et al., 2012), and telepsychology comparisons (Brenes et al., 2015; Mohr et al., 2005).
Overall, the strength of the evidence for telephone-delivered therapy was rated as high, given that there were three meta-analyses, one of which had a low risk of bias (Bee et al., 2008) and two of which had a moderate risk of bias (Mohr et al., 2008; Osenbach et al., 2013), which had results supporting the use of telephone-delivered therapy. In addition to this, there were several other high-quality individual RCTs (Brenes et al., 2015; Dwight-Johnson et al., 2011; Gellis et al., 2014; Lovell et al., 2006; Ludman et al., 2007; Mohr et al., 2011, 2012). The direction of the evidence was judged to be positive, since all studies except for one reported that telephone-delivered therapy was as effective as standard in-person treatment or was better than TAU on a range of outcomes. One study did not find a significant difference in improvement between telephone-delivered cognitive–behavioral therapy (T-CBT) and TAU groups (Mohr et al., 2011), but given the strong positive weight of the rest of the evidence, this finding was judged not to be significant enough to lower the direction rating to “Unclear.” The consistency of the findings was judged to be moderate to high, as the majority of studies reported similar trends in the findings, with telephone-delivered therapy being as effective as TAU or standard in-person treatments. Specifically, T-CBT was found to be as effective as in-person treatments in noninferiority trials (i.e., trials comparing a novel treatment to an existing standard treatment) but was found to be superior to TAU. Given that the majority of studies were consistent in their findings, it was determined that these results are highly likely to be replicable. The generalizability of these studies was rated as moderate to high, as the studies included a range of disorders and samples. The applicability of these findings was judged to be high, as the treatments and delivery formats are highly relevant and applicable to a Western health system. Thus, given the high strength, positive direction, moderate to high consistency, moderate to high generalizability, and high applicability, the use of telephone-delivered telepsychology for clients with mental health conditions was ranked as “Supported.”
Video Teleconference–Delivered Interventions
Twelve studies were identified that investigated the effectiveness of VTC-delivered interventions. One meta-analytic review looked at a range of telepsychology modalities, including VTC (Osenbach et al., 2013); one systematic review of VTC was identified (Rees & Maclaine, 2015) and 10 individual RCTs were also found, all of which used in-person intervention comparisons (Acierno et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2014; Egede et al., 2015; Fortney et al., 2015; Morland et al., 2014, 2015; Stubbings et al., 2013; Vogel et al., 2014; Yuen et al., 2015; Ziemba et al., 2014), other than one study that used a self-help book on evidence-based exposure and response prevention or waitlist comparison (Vogel et al., 2014).
Overall, the strength of the evidence base for VTC-delivered telepsychology interventions was rated as high. This rating was primarily based on the presence of five high-quality RCTs with a low risk of bias (Acierno et al., 2016; Egede et al., 2015; Fortney et al., 2015; Morland et al., 2014; Yuen et al., 2015). The remaining RCTs in the VTC literature yield were rated as being at moderate or high risk of bias due to methodological issues such as small sample sizes, high dropouts (i.e., >25%), or lack of blinding of assessors (i.e., the assessors were aware of the treatment condition; Choi et al., 2014; Morland et al., 2015; Stubbings et al., 2013; Vogel et al., 2014; Ziemba et al., 2014). The direction of the evidence was rated as positive, with all studies finding that VTC-delivered therapy had results showing it was as effective as in-person therapy and one study finding that VTC-delivered therapy was superior to using a self-help book on evidence-based exposure and response prevention, as well as a waitlist control (Vogel et al., 2014). The consistency was rated as high, as all studies were consistent in their findings. The generalizability of the evidence base was rated as moderate to high, with the samples in the studies representative of adults with mental health conditions. Of note, however, six of the included studies focused solely on U.S. veteran populations. The applicability was also judged to be high as all treatments offered in the studies were considered to be available in a Western health system. Taken together, the high strength, positive direction, high consistency, moderate to high generalizability, and high applicability of the VTC studies led to the use of VTC-delivered telepsychology for clients with mental health conditions being ranked as “Supported.”
Internet-Delivered Text-Based Treatments
Three studies were identified that investigated the effectiveness of psychotherapy delivered via the Internet, in which therapists and clients communicated in real time through type-written responses (webchats). A meta-analysis by Bee and colleagues (2008) looked at psychotherapy delivered via a range of telepsychology modalities, including the Internet, and two individual RCTs assessed Internet-delivered text-based therapy for depression with TAU comparison groups (Kessler et al., 2009; Kramer, Conijn, Oijevaar, & Riper, 2014).
The evidence base for Internet-delivered text-based therapy was judged to be of low strength, as it primarily consisted of two RCTs that were judged to be of low quality and have a high risk of selection bias (Kessler et al., 2009; Kramer et al., 2014). Although there was one meta-analysis, this study did not provide enough information to assess the individual merits of Internet-delivered text-based therapy and did not contribute to improving the strength of the evidence (Bee et al., 2008). The findings from the two RCTs were in the same positive direction, and the consistency was judged to be low to moderate as only two studies were included. The generalizability was judged to be moderate as one study used adults while the other used young people (i.e., where the mean age of the sample was 19.5 years). The applicability was rated as high, as the treatments were considered to be applicable and relevant to the Western health system, given the treatments are available in Western settings. Given the positive direction, low to moderate consistency, moderate generalizability, high applicability, but low strength of the evidence, the effectiveness of Internet-delivered text-based interventions for the treatment of mental health conditions, including depression, anxiety, PTSD, and adjustment disorder, was considered to be “Unknown.”
Discussion

The aim of this REA was to assess the effectiveness of telepsychology for clients with depression, anxiety, PTSD, or adjustment disorders. The reviewed literature suggests that there is a fast-growing evidence base in this area. The REA found that the evidence base is currently strongest and of the highest quality in the area of telephone-delivered and VTC-delivered interventions. Both telephone-delivered and VTC interventions met the criteria for a “Supported” treatment for mental health conditions, meaning that there is clear, consistent evidence of beneficial effect.
The “Supported” rating for telephone-delivered interventions was informed by three meta-analyses (two of good quality with few risk of bias issues and one with moderate quality and bias issues) and several high-quality RCTs, all of which indicated that telephone-delivered interventions are significantly more effective than TAU and, in noninferiority trials, are as effective as standard in-person treatments. Of note, there was one high-quality RCT with U.S. veterans that did not find a significant difference in outcomes for T-CBT for depression in comparison to a TAU group (Mohr et al., 2011). The authors suggest that this may be evidence that more treatment resistant groups, such as veterans, may need more intensive approaches to treatment than telephone-delivered therapy. The authors also question whether there may be a publication bias in the literature for telephone-delivered interventions, in which null results are not being routinely published. Alternatively, it may be the case that there is generally very little research being conducted on telephone-delivered interventions. This needs to be noted in an appraisal of the evidence base for telephone-delivered interventions for mental health conditions, but given the specific population in the study (veterans) and the strong weight of evidence in contrast to the findings of this study, it was not considered to be enough to lower the overall “Supported” ranking for telephone-delivered interventions for mental health conditions.
In the case of VTC-delivered interventions, the “Supported” rating was informed primarily by five high-quality RCTs with a low risk of bias. Notably, these five RCTs were all conducted in the United States with veteran populations (Acierno et al., 2016; Egede et al., 2015; Fortney et al., 2015; Morland et al., 2014; Yuen et al., 2015). Veterans are a specific population who may benefit from VTC interventions, given that they are a group with particularly high rates of mental health conditions (Ikin et al., 2004; Searle, Lawrence-Wood, Saccone, & McFarlane, 2013) and with documented barriers to accessing appropriate evidence-based treatments (Brooks et al., 2012). This is likely to be the reason for a proliferation of recent research into telepsychology-delivered interventions in veteran populations particularly.
The evidence for Internet-delivered text-based synchronous interventions for mental health conditions was limited and primarily consisted of two RCTs judged to be of only moderate quality due to a lack of control of selection bias (Kessler et al., 2009; Kramer et al., 2014). These RCTs suggested that Internet-delivered text-based synchronous interventions (by webchat) were superior to waitlist control, specifically in treating depression. Given the lack of high-quality evidence in this area, the use of Internet-delivered text-based synchronous interventions for mental health conditions was ranked as “Unknown,” indicating that there is insufficient evidence of a beneficial effect, and further methodologically rigorous research across different populations and mental health conditions is needed.
The technology involved in telepsychology interventions is relatively new, particularly in the case of VTC-delivered interventions. This is reflected in the fact that all of the VTC studies were conducted after 2013, with the more than half having been published in the last year. It is therefore likely that the evidence base for VTC interventions in particular will continue to grow at a rapid rate in the coming years.
Limitations and Future Directions
The findings must be considered alongside the limitations of an REA. The omission of potentially important papers, including those that were unpublished, not in English, and published prior to 2005, limits the comprehensiveness of an REA (Varker et al., 2015). The evaluations of the evidence were not as exhaustive as in a systematic review or meta-analysis methodology, and the study results were not synthesized in a statistical way. The REA focused specifically on adults, meaning the relevance of these findings to children and adolescents is unknown. The majority of the included studies were conducted in Western settings, which limits the generalizability to non-Western countries. In addition, the scope of this review was guided by the funders of the research and therefore limited to anxiety, depression, PTSD, and adjustment disorder. As such, several other important psychiatric disorders were not investigated. Finally, due to the fact that this was an REA, data from the studies included in this review were not meta-analyzed. This is a limitation of the REA methodology, in comparison to systematic reviews that often include meta-analysis.
An important direction for future research is to repeat and extend the current research, with the inclusion of meta-analysis. It will be important to identify which populations benefit most from telepsychology and to also identify whether adverse effects are observed in any populations. In addition, the current review revealed that relatively few RCTs have been conducted on Internet-delivered text-based interventions, and those that have been done have had methodological limitations. Therefore, there is a need for further well-designed RCTs to examine the efficacy of Internet-delivered text-based interventions.
Conclusions

Based on the findings of this REA, both telephone- and VTC-delivered interventions for mental health conditions are “Supported” by the current available evidence. Synchronous Internet-delivered text-based interventions require further methodologically rigorous RCTs and reviews in order to provide more robust data on their effectiveness. The potential for telepsychology to overcome common barriers to treatment access and its apparent efficacy and equivalence to in-person treatments therefore suggests that it is a promising delivery method for increasing the reach of evidence-based psychological interventions. This may be of particular use for those in rural and remote communities who have significant issues with access to evidence-based psychological therapies. Given that these are relatively new technologies, which are increasing in their mass availability, it will also be important to watch the evidence in this area over the next 5–10 years.",
"23": "Health disparities across the nation are on the rise, most notably among Latinx and Hispanic immigrant populations. For example, there are higher mortality rates among Hispanic individuals, ages 25–44, compared to the majority population (Pew Research Center, 2002). These health disparities are often compounded for rural Latinx immigrants who lack access to health care resources and services (Cristancho, Garces, Peters, & Mueller, 2008; Rivers & Patino, 2006). Given the growing inequity in health care access among rural Latinx immigrants (Casey, Blewett, & Call, 2004), enhancing access to effective health care services is paramount.
In an effort to better understand health disparities issues for racial ethnic minority groups, public health researchers have proposed a variety of theoretical explanatory frameworks, however the Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities is the most rigorously studied and addresses inherent limitations of alternative models (Dressler, Oths, & Gravlee, 2005). This model directly acknowledges the centrality of social, psychological, and structural factors in the establishment and maintenance of health disparities among racial and ethnic minority groups (Dressler et al., 2005). One solution that has been proposed for addressing health disparities is integrated behavioral health care (Bridges et al., 2014), which is defined as an integration of both behavioral and physical health care. The goals of integrated behavioral health care are to better coordinate and communicate with primary health care providers (i.e., physicians, nurse practitioners, etc.) so that physical and mental health are equally addressed. This practice is becoming increasingly common in hospital and clinic settings. However, the lack of behavioral health care providers in rural areas poses a challenge for Latinx populations living in these areas.
One solution that hospitals and clinics have incorporated to increase access to psychological services for rural populations is telepsychology. Telepsychology refers to the utility of telecommunication (i.e., therapy via phone and/or video teleconferencing, phone applications, etc.) and e-mail for the delivery of face-to-face psychological services with a mental health provider (APA, 2013). Although there are vast applications of telepsychology in the mental health field, behavioral health clinics can utilize telepsychology platforms exclusively (e.g., practitioners provide all behavioral health services to clients remotely) or employ a hybrid model (e.g., practitioners provide services to clients in person and remotely via telepsychology platforms). We argue for the need and utility for integrated telepsychology training clinics to reduce health disparities for rural Latinx immigrants. Therefore, the purpose of this article is to review issues related to health disparities among rural Latinx immigrant populations, discuss the role of telepsychology and integrated behavioral health care in addressing health disparities, and to propose specialized graduate training in telepsychology, rural Latinx health disparities and integrated behavioral health care to address health disparities in rural communities.
Throughout this article we focus on rural Latinx immigrant health disparities while attending to rural Hispanic immigrant health disparities literature. The definitions between the two identities are commonly conflated; however, they are distinct ethnic groups with heterogeneous health disparities present in rural United States. Hispanic was a term first used in the 1980 U.S. Census to refer to people who speak Spanish (Salinas & Lozano, 2017), whereas Latino(s) is defined as a group of people residing in the United States of Caribbean, Central American, and Mexican legacy (De Luca & Escoto, 2012). Although both pan-ethnic terms contain heterogeneous cultural and ethnic groups, neither Hispanic or Latinx are racial groups (Salinas & Lozano, 2017). We use the term Latinx to refer to Latino/a individuals in gender-neutral terms, which is being widely used by activists and scholars as a radical shift away from linguistic gender binary to gender fluidity (Salinas & Lozano, 2017).
Health Disparities in Latinx Immigrant Communities

Hispanic individuals comprise the largest immigrant group in the United States, consisting of 55.3 million individuals (Lewis, 2017). Of this group, 23.5% reside in poverty and 24.3% lack health insurance (Lewis, 2017). Health disparities are seen in both mortality and illness rates among Hispanic immigrant groups. This may be due to decreased health insurance coverage; increased work hours to financially support others; immigration issues such as limited English proficiency; limited access to medical records and health history from the country of origin; adoption of diet and behavioral patterns of the mainstream culture (e.g., decreased fiber consumption and exercise, and increased use of cigarettes and alcohol); and other barriers to health care such as cost and transportation (Derose, Escarce, & Lurie, 2007; Kandula, Lauderdale, & Baker, 2007; Ortega et al., 2007; Zsembik & Fennell, 2005).
Although health disparities are present, as a whole Latinx individuals experience greater life expectancy compared to non-Hispanic Whites (Heron, 2015), a phenomenon called the “Hispanic or Latino health paradox” (Ruiz, Campos, & Garcia, 2016). This paradox theorizes that sociocultural factors moderate Latinx health resilience and that increased social integration is a moderator for health (Ruiz et al., 2016), reflecting the strength that Latinx cultural values of social harmony, family, and respect have on health. What may be contributing to health care issues, however are sociocultural factors that negatively impact health care access.
Latinx populations have the highest uninsured rate compared to other ethnic/racial groups (DeNavas-Walt et al., 2006). Furthermore, Latinx individuals experience the highest rates of injuries and illnesses while on the job (Byler, 2013). In the 2015–2016 National Agricultural Workers Survey, 83% of hired farmworkers identified as Latino or Hispanic (U.S. Department of Labor, 2018). There is ample evidence of higher levels of occupational injury among migrant farm workers (Scribani, Wyckoff, Jenkins, Bauer, & Earle-Richardson, 2013; Xiao, Stoecklin-Marois, Li, McCurdy, & Schenker, 2014), which has been strongly associated with stress and depression (Jadhav, Achutan, Haynatzki, Rajaram, & Rautiainen, 2015).
Latinx populations also experience mental health care concerns in the United States, with the Latinx population being about half as likely compared to White Non-Hispanic Americans to access mental health treatment (Shim, Compton, Rust, Druss, & Kaslow, 2009). Similar systemic barriers to physical health care limit access to mental health care services for Latinx individuals (e.g., lack of health insurance, cost of services, minimal bilingual providers). Research has consistently found that Latinx cultural perceptions of seeking health care may further contribute to disparities, with Latinx cultural values largely emphasizing familial and/or religious support rather than accessing mental health care (Caplan et al., 2013; Chavez, Hubbell, Mishra, & Valdez, 1997; Garcés, Scarinci, & Harrison, 2006). Latinx individuals present with more somatic complaints versus mental health concerns and report greater stigma toward receiving a mental health diagnosis (Vega, Rodriguez, & Ang, 2010) and mental health care (Nadeem et al., 2007). Additionally, perceived discrimination experienced by Latinx individuals via mental health care providers may directly contribute to having a psychiatric disorder (Held & Lee, 2017). Both practical barriers (e.g., lack of insurance, travel, English proficiency) and cultural concerns (e.g., stigma accessing mental health care) contribute to decreased health care access (Nadeem et al., 2007), therefore increased community based approaches, access to culturally mindful and accessible care among rural Latinx and Hispanic communities are needed.
Beyond cultural considerations, larger systemic barriers may severely limit mental health care access for the Latinx population (Anderson et al., 2003; Ku & Matani, 2001). The Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities emphasizes structural barriers, and systemic and perceived racism in the establishment and maintenance of health disparities for racial and ethnic minority groups (Dressler et al., 2005). While there are numerous health disparities models, one of the most cited models with strong empirical support is the Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities (Clark, Anderson, Clark, & Williams, 1999; Dressler et al., 2005; Williams & Collins, 1995), which has been used to explain health disparities in minority groups.
The Psychosocial Stressor Model of Health Disparities

Although the Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities was originally proposed to theorize African Americans health disparities, this model is relevant to address disparities among Latinx individuals within the current sociopolitical climate. The Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities posits that institutionalized and perceived racism, coupled with daily stressors of racial and ethnic minority groups result in disparate health outcomes (Dressler et al., 2005). For Latinx communities, institutionalized barriers are enacted in a variety of ways. For example, some of the barriers include a lack of mental health providers who reflect cultural diversity, interpreter services or bilingual providers, cultural competency training for health care providers, linguistically and culturally appropriate health materials, and culturally specific health care settings (Anderson et al., 2003). Studies have documented deleterious effects of perceived discrimination and acculturation stress on Latinx health outcomes (Lara, Gamboa, Kahramanian, Morales, & Hayes Bautista, 2005; Moradi & Risco, 2006). Physical and mental health disparities are vastly present within rural Latinx and Hispanic populations (Bridges et al., 2014). For example, Latinx communities are at high risk for mental health problems such as anxiety, depression, and substance abuse and these are often related to experiences of discrimination and racism (Willerton, Dankoski, & Martir, 2008).
From a psychosocial perspective, the broader sociocultural climate may directly impact the health outcomes of Latinx immigrants (Pew Research Center, 2002; Torres, Santiago, Walts, & Richards, 2018), Latino males are four times more likely compared to White males to be incarcerated in state and/or federal prisons (Rios-Ellis, 2005), and about 62% of Latinx children live near or in poverty (Wildsmith, Alvira-Hammond, & GuzmAn, 2016). Since 2016, immigration reforms have increased the presence of Immigration and Custom Enforcement agents, with a 30% increase in arrests between 2016 and 2017 (Pew Research Center, 2018). This climate may have created a culture of increased fear and trepidation and may contribute to the diminished utilization of public and private health care services among Latinx populations in the United States (Rhodes et al., 2015). Given the current climate, viable resources and services are paramount, yet many rural Latinx immigrants lack access or underutilize services that might enhance their mental and physical outcomes (Ku & Matani, 2001; Young, Klap, Sherbourne, & Wells, 2001). The Psychosocial Stress Model of Health Disparities provides a strong theoretical basis for the need for increased resources and training to best serve rural Latinx populations.
The Role of Integrated Behavioral HealthCare in Reducing Health Disparities

There is a lack of mental health providers in rural United States compared to urban areas. About 20% of the United States population is living in rural areas (U.S. Census Bureau, 2016) with only 10% of the United States mental health workforce practicing in rural settings (Ellis, Konrad, Thomas, & Morrissey, 2009). Interdisciplinary collaborations are required to successfully prevent and treat rural community mental health issues, such as substance abuse, depression, exposure to trauma, physical health issues, and preventative vaccinations (Smalley et al., 2010). This need has been recognized at the national level with initiatives such as the President’s New Freedom Commission on Mental Health (2003) and HRSA’s behavioral health initiatives to increase access and utilization of mental health services (National Association of State Medicaid Directors, 2008).
Integrated behavioral health care is a treatment modality that partners with medical services to reduce mental health seeking stigma and to increase health care utilization via incorporating mental health care into medical settings, and thereby associating mental and physical health (Smalley et al., 2010). Increasingly, integrated behavioral health in primary care settings is meeting the needs of Latinx populations by addressing both biological and psychosocial health factors. For example, one study tested the effectiveness of integrated behavioral health care to reduce disparities among Latinx patients indicating that both Latinx and Non-Latinx White patients had comparable utilization rates, improvements in psychosocial symptoms, and expressed high satisfaction with integrated behavioral services (Bridges et al., 2014). Further, Bridges et al. (2017) found that 60% of patients referred from primary care to mental health care were underserved populations less commonly seen in mental health care settings due to a variety of reasons (e.g., racial and ethnic minorities, socioeconomic status, insurance status). These preliminary findings provide support for the utility of integrated behavioral health care in addressing mental health concerns among Latinx patients.
Although integrated behavioral health care is vital to meet the health care needs of rural communities, these services do not address the issue of the limited rural mental health workforce. Technology, more specifically telepsychology within integrated health care settings, may address workforce shortage issues. Applied psychology programs can increase the number of psychologists trained to provide integrated telepsychology services for rural areas.
Telepsychology

Telepsychology is a new service delivery method that increases opportunities to reach more individuals in a rapidly changing world. Telehealth has been found effective for providing rural integrated medical services (Brownlee, Graham, Doucette, Hotson, & Halverson, 2010; Finkelstein, Speedie, Zhou, Potthoff, & Ratner, 2011; Swinton, Robinson, & Bischoff, 2009) and provides access to psychological services that would otherwise be difficult to access in rural areas. Furthermore, integrating telepsychology into rural primary care settings has led to improved mental health outcomes (Smalley et al., 2010).
Despite literature on the effectiveness and utility of telepsychology services, there is limited research on integrating telepsychology within psychology training programs (Lustgarten & Elhai, 2018). Moreover, APA accreditation and state licensure requirements do not focus on telepsychology competencies or effective practice guidelines (Barnett, 2018). Fortunately, there is growing research regarding telehealth training (Barnett, 2018; McCord, Saenz, Armstrong, & Elliott, 2015). While several studies outline the implementation of telepsychology clinics within academic training institutions (McCord et al., 2015; McKay et al., 2013; Simpson, Guerrini, & Rochford, 2015; Simpson, Rochford, Livingstone, English, & Austin, 2014), the role of telepsychology clinics in reducing rural communities health disparities is still elusive (Tarlow, McCord, Elliott, & Brossart, 2014).
Training Recommendations

We propose approaching rural integrated behavioral health care inequities with Latinx populations by creating contextually driven solutions. Graduate programs in applied psychology (e.g., clinical, counseling, and school) can create clinical training opportunities to educate and train future mental health clinicians in integrated behavioral health care, particularly attending to rural Latinx populations. By establishing specialized training, students can understand the unique opportunities present for an integrated behavioral health care practitioner, focus on the specific psychosocial climate of the rural communities, and learn how integrated health care can effectively address health disparities. Furthermore, telepsychology clinical supervisors need to be trained in cultural considerations for rural Latinx populations in order to provide competent clinical supervision to students. It is important to attend to a diverse (e.g., multiracial, multiethnic, multilingual) representation of supervisors and/or students providing telepsychological services. Students will need to gain a comprehensive understanding of past, present, and future directions of integrated behavioral health care and the increased rural Latinx diversity in order to meet this burgeoning need.
Developing Community Partnerships
Through established relationships with invested rural community partners and health care professionals, graduate training programs may facilitate clinical practicum partnerships to provide telepsychology services. We suggest that applied psychology programs consider the Psychosocial Stressor Model of Health Disparities (Clark et al., 1999; Williams & Collins, 1995) when developing community partnerships. First, we suggest that programs identify rural communities that may be in need of mental health services. Second, we encourage programs to learn about the cultural identity of each potential rural community partnership and establish relationships with community leaders. Through these partnerships, it is important to learn of the institutionalized and perceived racism that are compounded by daily stressors within the communities. Training clinics may encounter barriers in facilitating relationships with rural communities, therefore we recommend identifying and partnering with trusted individuals within the communities in order to build trust overtime.
Integrating Telepsychology and Behavioral Health Care
Graduate training programs intentionally seek out and build working relationships with rural integrated behavioral health care settings is an important step in the process. Partnering with integrated behavioral health care settings would provide access to behavioral health care that rural patients might not usually seek and/or receive, and thereby increase the overall health of rural patients. Training clinics may encounter challenges when identifying and/or partnering with integrated behavioral health care settings. We recommend that training clinics reach out to integrated behavioral health care centers within driving range of the training program to administer a needs based assessment with each clinic and to assess mutual compatibility. Focusing upon integrated behavioral health care settings, such as Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC), that focus on providing access to historically low access populations (e.g., rural Latinx populations) could be one place to start.
Awareness of Sociocultural Climate
With the ever-diversifying rural landscape, it is imperative that graduate training programs who provide telepsychology services integrate rural multicultural considerations that take into account sociocultural climates and specific rural cultural contexts that are receiving telepsychology services (McCord et al., 2015; McKay et al., 2013; Tarlow et al., 2014). For example, graduate training programs may consider how broader political discussions concerning immigration reform may impact help-seeking behavior. Lack of rural mental health care access reveals a large population who are unable to receive proper health care access due to ecological, social, and geographical barriers (McCord et al., 2015; Tarlow et al., 2014). It is paramount that graduate training programs address structural and systemic causes of health care disparities via ongoing education and training (Barnett, 2018; McCord et al., 2015). For example, programs may partner with integrated behavioral health clinics or nonprofits focusing in social action to facilitate trainings concerning relevant topics. Graduate training programs may obtain outside funding to increase accessibility to telepsychological services and partner with community embedded organizations and/or clinics to provide services to underserved populations (McCord et al., 2015; Tarlow et al., 2014).
Research Recommendations

Future research is recommended regarding telepsychology training and Latinx populations. We suggest using a Community-Based Participatory Research (Israel, Eng, Schulz, & Parker, 2012; Israel, Schulz, Parker, & Becker, 1998) as a theoretical framework since it prioritizes community partnerships. Future research may examine the use of online trainings created via training clinics to increase rural providers cultural awareness in working with Latinx clients, and how community partnerships with trusted rural sources may increase therapeutic outcomes and alliance via telepsychological services. Additionally, future research may explore therapeutic outcomes and alliance via in-person psychotherapy as compared to telepsychology (Varghese, Nolan, Ali, Anderson, & Southerland, 2019). Further research is needed to examine how supervision via nonminority identified supervisors may impact students’ cultural awareness in providing telepsychology services.
Conclusions

Health disparities among racial-ethnic minority groups, such as rural Latinx immigrants, are an increasing concern. Access to care and systemic and structure barriers further exacerbate disparate health outcomes for rural Latinx immigrant populations. Given theoretical explanatory models of the role and negative impact of systemic, structural, and stress factors in health disparities among racial-ethnic minority groups, we highlight the need for integrate behavioral health care in rural areas. The use of telepsychology can enhance access and the effectiveness of rural integrated behavioral health care. We argue that academic training institutions are positioned well to advance establish integrated telepsychology behavioral health care in rural communities in hopes of reducing health disparities among Latinx immigrant populations. We highlight the need for academic training programs in applied psychology to approach rural integrated behavioral health care inequities by creating contextually driven solutions. Academic training programs should develop community partnerships to understand the needs of and collaborate with rural communities to establish integrated telepsychology behavioral health care.",
"24": "The use of various technologies, such as videoconferencing, email, text messaging, apps, and social media, is nearly ubiquitous in our society today. Countless individuals use these media as their primary means of communicating and for managing many aspects of their lives. Beyond making online purchases, paying bills, and scheduling appointments, for many individuals, these are the primary means of establishing and maintaining relationships in their lives. The benefits of these technologies are numerous. There is such an ease of communication and great convenience that come with sending messages, photos, and videos with individuals in our social networks. Smartphones now come preloaded with a range of apps, and many thousands of additional apps are readily available to be downloaded to enhance our lives in the areas of health, fitness, education, finance, personal enrichment, and so many other aspects of our lives.
These patterns are true both for the public at large and for mental health clinicians. Thus, it is likely that many clients will expect to communicate with their psychotherapist using these media, and even to maintain an interactive online presence with their psychotherapist, such as through social media. After all, this is how many individuals conduct the relationships in their lives, and the psychotherapy relationship may be experienced as just another relationship in which they are participating. For psychologists as well, it is very possible that what we do in our personal lives may carry over into our professional lives due to familiarity, comfort, convenience, and ease of use of these technologies. Yet, as Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) illustrate, although the use of these various technological media brings with it many potential benefits for the psychotherapy relationship and process, these media also create a number of ethical, legal, and clinical challenges that may ensnare the unwary or unprepared clinician.
It is easy to become enamored with these technologies. After all, they can do so much to enhance our lives. They can create efficiencies in how we run our practice, such as through online scheduling and electronic claims submission and billing. In addition to these administrative uses of technologies, they offer a wide range of possible enhancements to clinical practice. The practice of telepsychology can provide access to much-needed treatment for individuals who might not otherwise have been able to access it, such as for those in rural or remote areas, those who are homebound, those who need specialized treatment services not available in their local area, or those who might not seek treatment otherwise, such as due to stigma or feelings of embarrassment (Barnett & Kolmes, 2016). Similarly, various technologies may be used to address crises with clients between in-person treatment sessions, to send reminders to clients about assignments, and to check in on their functioning; psychological testing can be administered and then rapidly scored online; virtual and augmented reality techniques offer treatment for phobias without the risks, costs, and time of doing them in person; and apps may be integrated into in-person treatment to provide greater support to clients and to enhance communication of vital information about clients' functioning and status to the psychotherapist in real time.
Yet, despite all the many potential benefits of integrating these various technologies into treatment, as Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) emphasize, it is essential that each psychologist addresses several key issues in preparation for using these technologies with clients. It is vital that we adequately prepare ourselves before using these technologies and that we are mindful of several key issues when using them in clinical practice.
1. COMPETENCE

A key ethics issue relevant to all clinical practices, whether in person or online, is that of competence. When using these various technologies, all the usual ethics requirements to only provide clinical services for which we possess the necessary competence remain relevant. Yet, clinical practice online or that integrates technologic media into it brings with it additional competence requirements. Not only must we possess adequate clinical competence for the professional services we are offering, but we must also possess the technological competence necessary to effectively utilize the technologies and media in question (and to effectively train our clients in their use).
There is an extensive and rapidly expanding literature on online treatments that psychologists must be familiar with both at present and as new studies are published. Not all online treatments are equally effective, and not all clients or their difficulties are appropriately treated utilizing various online media. An essential element of our clinical competence is knowledge of, and training in the use of, treatments that are evidence-based. Research demonstrates a wide range of online and technology-infused treatments that not only are as effective as traditional in-person treatments, but for some individuals, they are more appropriate and more clinically and financially effective. There also exists a variety of online treatments that may not be appropriate for clients, so we must be informed consumers of the research on online treatments for various disorders and appropriately match them to individual clients' needs.
Even when online treatments are proven to be generally effective overall, as Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) emphasize, not all clients' treatment needs are best treated online. Clients with significant suicide risk and other impulse control and dangerousness issues likely need in-person treatment to most appropriately and effectively meet their treatment needs. Thus, the most appropriate treatment modality should be matched with client treatment needs. It is important to assess each client's treatment needs from the outset and determine if telepsychology will best meet these needs. As all psychologists know, in actual practice, treatment decisions are much more complicated than in theory. So, although telepsychology might not be the ideal treatment for a certain client, we still might choose to use it based on the client's particular circumstances. We must consider all reasonably available treatment options and their relative risks and benefits in our decision-making process. At times, the desired or “best option” is not feasible, and instead, we must select the most realistic option, taking all actions possible to implement it in a manner in keeping with the client's best interests.
In addition to seeking research evidence to support the use of online treatments for a range of presenting problems, we must be informed and critical consumers in our use of apps with clients. Thousands of apps exist, and new ones are produced and disseminated daily. Yet, just because an app exists and is marketed to the general public, this does not mean it has been developed based on sound psychological theory or that it actually has been proven helpful or effective. For the vast majority of mental health–related apps, little evidence exists to support their use with clients (Lui, Marchs, & Barry, 2017). Again, it is recommended that psychologists be informed and skeptical consumers, seeking evidence to support the app's use, and if none is available, to use it personally and “play with it” to become familiar with it and to assess its potential usefulness in treatment. It is also important to investigate privacy protections and threats associated with each app. Some regularly collect data from users, something psychologists and clients should know about before using apps.
2. EDUCATION AND TRAINING

Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) make the important point that at present, there is no evidence that those in training and those in practice are receiving the education and training necessary to ensure sufficient competence with technology-infused clinical practice. They thoughtfully point out an absence of needed telemental health standards in the profession of psychology, and an absence of education and training requirements that address the use of technological media in clinical practice. At present, accreditation standards for doctoral training in clinical and counseling psychology include a broad range of knowledge areas and skills that must be integrated into each student's coursework and supervised clinical experiences. This dovetails with licensing requirements that assess for competence in a broad range of knowledge areas and skills. Yet, both accreditation and licensure requirements at present do not focus on telemental health competencies or the effective integration of various technological media into clinical practice.
At present, the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017) indicates that the ethics code applies to all professional activities by psychologists “across a variety of contexts, such as in person, postal, telephone, internet, and other electronic transmissions” (p. 2). This is extremely important information, but the ethics code is quite limited in that there are no specific standards relevant to telepsychology or the use of technology in practice. Additionally, it is assumed that the standards of the ethics code can directly be applied to telepsychology and technology-infused practice, and that the ethics code's standards provide sufficient guidance to clinicians for this type of practice. This assumption is highly questionable, and there is no evidence available to suggest that psychologists presently have the guidance needed to provide telepsychology services ethically, legally, and competently. As Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) point out, the APA Ethics Code has not kept up with rapidly changing developments in the role and use of various technologies in clinical practice, and a major revision of the ethics code that more fully addresses telemental health and technology issues (similar to the recently revised American Counseling Association Code of Ethics) is sorely needed. At the time of this writing, the APA Ethics Office has begun work on a major revision of the ethics code, and there is an indication that this recommendation is at least being considered (Childress Beatty, personal communication).
Additionally, training standards are needed that specify the core competencies needed for the ethical, legal, and effective practice of telepsychology. This goes well beyond the current Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (APA, 2013) and speaks to the need for accreditation, licensing, and continuing education standards. At a minimum, the practice of telepsychology and the integration of various technologies into clinical practice should be integrated into each student's education and clinical training experiences (implying that those who do provide the education and oversee the training are competent in telepsychology practice as well). As the practice of psychology changes, education and training need to keep pace so that those in training and those in practice will possess the competence needed to provide these services effectively. Licensing boards should assess candidates for the competencies needed for how they will be practicing psychology. In essence, we must ensure that we are adequately preparing trainees for the world they will be functioning in when they enter practice and that they actually possess the competencies needed for ethical, legal, and clinically effective practice.
It is also important that those in practice remain current with ongoing developments in telepsychology and technology-infused practice. Many states have continuing education requirements for biannual licensure renewal that specify specific areas of additional education and training that must be obtained. At present, these may include ethics, law, and risk management; diversity; mandatory reporting requirements; and clinical supervision; among others. Yet, at present, there are no known licensing board requirements for continuing education relevant to telepsychology and the integration of various technologies into professional practice. It seems prudent to address each of these needs, as so many psychologists are engaged in this type of practice.
3. BOUNDARIES, SELF-DISCLOSURE, AND MULTIPLE RELATIONSHIPS

As was highlighted above, many clients will expect their psychotherapist to utilize in treatment the various technologies they use in their personal lives. This may include videoconferencing, email, text messaging, and social media. Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) very clearly highlight the need to possess the competence necessary to effectively integrate the use of these technological media into clinical practice. One issue they mention that deserves additional attention is that of maintaining appropriate professional boundaries with clients. This includes the issues Lustgarten and Elhai mention, such as setting limits on client expectations for psychotherapist responsiveness to emails and text messages, but goes far beyond this when considering the use of social media.
Numerous individuals utilize a range of social media in their personal lives. These may include platforms such as Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter, although many others exist and new ones are being developed regularly. It can be a common occurrence for a psychotherapist to receive a “friend request” or other invitation to participate online in the client's social network. In addition to threats to client privacy, this raises significant boundary concerns. One might ask what the harm is in participating in a client's social network. After all, this is an easy way to share information. Yet, psychotherapists must consider the nature of the professional relationship and how social media participation might influence or impact this. It is possible that social media participation with clients may constitute a social relationship, thus creating multiple relationships that can be inconsistent with the goals of treatment and the client's best interests.
Many individuals share a wide range of information about themselves via social media. This may include photos, videos, and information from one's personal life. When keeping in touch with friends and family, such use of social media may greatly enhance the ability to maintain an ongoing relationship. For the psychotherapist, it is important to thoughtfully consider the nature of the information to be shared, both for comfort and appropriateness, keeping in mind that information sharing flows in two directions. How much personal information do you want to share with your clients, how much of what you post online for friends and family is of relevance to your clients' treatment, and might this level of sharing adversely impact the treatment relationship?
Psychologists should consider the use of social media with clients as both a self-disclosure issue and a multiple relationship issue. Some self-disclosure in clinical practice is unavoidable, such as wearing a wedding band or wearing religious attire. Intentional self-disclosure can be an important therapeutic intervention as long as its use is consistent with agreed-upon goals of treatment. Self-disclosure should be done keeping in mind our primary obligation to only act in our clients' best interests. Modifying the psychotherapy relationship into a social one may not be in your clients' best interest. Furthermore, if you would not engage in a friendship with a current client outside of in-person treatment, why would you consider doing this online? Again, just because we utilize certain technological media in our personal lives, it does not mean that they should be applied in the same manner in our professional relationships. This is true even when the client solicits this additional dimension to the relationship.
Even if participation in social media with a particular client does not represent an inappropriate multiple relationship, it is important to assess privacy and security safeguards present (or absent!). Many social media platforms routinely collect user data, and they frequently have access to the identities of each other person the user interacts with online. Thus, psychotherapists may unwittingly be sharing who all their clients are, something that clearly is not intended.
As Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) suggest, such issues and challenges should be considered and planned for before they happen. It is recommended that each psychologist develop a social media policy and a use of technology policy. Psychologist Keely Kolmes has developed such written policies that may be downloaded from her Web site and modified for use (see Barnett & Kolmes, 2016, for details on these policies). These policies should be reviewed and discussed with clients as part of the informed consent process. The role of various technologies, client preferences, and psychologist policies should each be reviewed and discussed at the outset of the professional relationship, ensuring the client's understanding of why certain boundaries are in place in the professional relationship and how their use is intended to promote the client's welfare and best interests. This will help prevent problems such as the potential for a negative impact on the treatment relationship if you ignore or deny clients' friend requests and other social media participation requests.
4. CONCLUSIONS

Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) do an outstanding job of introducing readers to the many benefits and challenges associated with telepsychology and technology-infused practice. They correctly alert us to the need for our profession to catch up with the rapidly changing online world in which we each live and function. Their recommendations are well stated and an important call for action that will hopefully be heeded by leaders in the profession, educators, clinical supervisors, licensing boards, researchers, clinicians, and trainees.
This commentary has emphasized the need for the development of technological competence in addition to clinical competence, along with the need to be critical and informed consumers about research on the uses of various technologic media. It has also emphasized the need for additional training, the development of standards, and a focus on ongoing professional development relevant to telepsychology and the use of various technologies in clinical practice. Finally, the need to consider the use of social media as a boundary, self-disclosure, and multiple relationship issue has been emphasized as a preventative strategy to promote each client's welfare.",
"25": "1. INTRODUCTION

Over the past decade, mobile and Web technologies have infiltrated every part of our lives, changing the way we communicate, learn, entertain ourselves, monitor our health, and manage our personal and professional lives. Inevitably, a wide variety of products have emerged with an aim to use technology to manage and improve our mental health. Regulatory guidelines have thus far primarily focused on the provision of “traditional” telemedicine services; this generally includes psychotherapy, assessments, consultation, or psychiatric services provided via videoconferencing or telephone (Maheu, Pulier, McMenamin, & Posen, 2012). Little attention has been given to developing standards for online programs that provide psychosocial treatment, coaching, or other support direct-to-consumers' mobile phones or computers—an increasingly common mode of delivery.
One burgeoning form of online service is Internet-guided self-help (IGSH) programs, defined for the purposes of this article as any mental health program delivered via mobile or Web that is primarily self-guided, and also includes facilitation or support provided by a professional or paraprofessional. Providers offering IGSH are bound to the same ethical codes as their in-person counterparts; however, the application of ethics standards in an online, guided self-help format can create unique challenges. This article ventures to illuminate ethical issues that arise in the implementation of IGSH programs, and the practical implications that must be addressed to deliver programs that maximize benefit and minimize the potential for harm to consumers.
2. IGSH WITHIN THE TREATMENT LANDSCAPE

Internet-guided self-help programs represent a relatively new development within the broad context of mental health treatment modalities. It is important to differentiate IGSH from related approaches and to understand how ethical guidelines and issues related to other treatment modalities may or may not extend to IGSH. Much like traditional guided self-help treatments, IGSH may be considered along with a spectrum of support between pure self-help (traditional or Internet-based) and individual psychotherapy including telehealth. In fact, the American Psychological Association's (2013) Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology explicitly acknowledge Web-based self-help as falling under the broader telepsychology umbrella, though they are largely silent on IGSH specifically. Existing in a space between self-help and therapy, IGSH programs pose unique challenges and highlight the need for professional ethics to evolve alongside technology.
The rise of IGSH models is an exciting development within the broader telemedicine field, given IGSH programs' potential for widespread distribution, scalability, and a growing evidence base. As compared to one-on-one telehealth services, IGSH programs typically are designed to serve a significantly larger number of users per “guide”1 without compromising clinical effectiveness or user satisfaction. The scale of IGSH programs offers the potential to drive down costs for organizations and consumers, reduce wait times for care, and extend the reach of empirically supported treatments. IGSH programs are typically based on cognitive behavioral and related therapies, although preliminary research suggests that psychodynamic interventions viably may be adapted to IGSH as well (Andersson et al., 2012). Research on the efficacy of IGSH programs has targeted a wide variety of mental health conditions such as anxiety disorders, (Hadjistavropoulos et al., 2014; Schneider, Mataix-Cols, Marks, & Bachofen, 2005), depression (Andersson & Cuijpers, 2009; Richards et al., 2015), and disordered eating, including binge eating disorder and bulimia nervosa (Carrard et al., 2011; Wagner et al., 2013). IGSH programs frequently target individuals with subthreshold or mild-to-moderate clinical presentations, although there is some evidence that such programs may treat severe mental health symptoms effectively as well (Bower et al., 2013).
Internet-guided self-help program offerings vary in terms of content, duration, frequency and modality of contact, and the role that guides play in supporting the individual's learning. They are short-term interventions; in the research we reviewed, it was most common for programs to comprise 5–10 weekly modules. Support is typically provided via telephone or online on a weekly basis, is initiated by the therapist or in response to clients' questions/expressed concerns, and is brief in nature (e.g., 10–20 min; Drozd et al., 2016). Guidance is provided most commonly by professional mental health therapists, but may also have been delivered by advanced graduate students, primary care physicians, nurses, and peer counselors (Day, McGrath, & Wojtowicz, 2013). Available evidence suggests that the professional credential of the guide does not have a significant effect on the success of an IGSH intervention. For a more thorough review of the impact of guidance on digital interventions, see Brown and Jones (2017).
Despite a growing research base demonstrating the efficacy of IGSH, these programs are not readily available in routine care in the USA, arguably due to the lack of training available to providers, lack of access to programs, lack of attention to organizational drivers for implementation, and concerns about competition with face-to-face care providers (Drozd et al., 2016; Wyatt & Sullivan, 2005). In contrast, the UK, for example, includes guided self-help including computerized CBT as a recommendation for subthreshold or mild-to-moderate depression, panic, and generalized anxiety disorder within their National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidelines for a stepped care model of treatment (National institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2011). IGSH has also been introduced via workplace health and wellness programs to address common mental health concerns and improve lifestyle (e.g., reduce problem drinking, and improve sleep), which in turn may reduce absenteeism and improve productivity (Joyce et al., 2016). The growing adoption of IGSH programs underscores the need for regulatory guidance and oversight in their implementation.
3. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN DEVELOPING AN IGSH PROGRAM

This article attempts to examine some of the challenges in the development and delivery of ethically sound IGSH and propose suggestions for future consideration. To do so, we focused on three broad questions: How can ethics inform how IGSH applications design their programs and frame the role of their guides? What are the challenges associated with managing clinical risk in the context of these platforms, and how can we minimize the potential for negative impacts? Lastly, how can we ensure that our user base is appropriate for and well-informed about the risks and benefits of IGSH? The suggestions we arrive at—and in many cases, the additional questions that emerge—are intended to be aspirational in nature and focused on developing best practices, rather than more narrowly focused on the question of avoiding litigation or meeting specific legal requirements (which are, in any case, still murky in this emerging space).
4. DELIVERING AND FRAMING AN IGSH PROGRAM

4.1. Model
Internet-guided self-help programs are typically deployed in one of the two models: stepped care and centralized units. Stepped care interventions are offered to patients on a “least restrictive” basis, generally meaning treatment is initiated at the lowest intensity for which a positive response can be expected. Group therapy and guided IGSH programs typically represent a “second step” following pure self-help. Higher levels would include in-person, brief- or longer-term therapy and inpatient treatments (Newman, 2000). The impacts of less restrictive steps are monitored systematically, and care is stepped up as necessary (Bower & Gilbody, 2005). In stepped care models, IGSH is typically delivered within the primary care clinic by a trained physician, social worker, psychiatric nurse, or other embedded mental health practitioner who retains responsibility for the patient's care, and will monitor progress to determine whether the patient can be considered discharged successfully, or requires additional treatment. The UK's nationalized health care system has adopted a stepped care model of treatment and utilizes IGSH interventions to provide less restrictive mental health treatment to their patients within the primary care system.
In centralized unit models, a stand-alone entity is responsible for all aspects of the intervention, including developing the intervention; maintaining the software involved; training and monitoring therapists or guides; and screening, assigning, and monitoring patients. For example, in one Canadian study, the “Online Therapy Unit for Service, Education, and Research” effectively coordinated computerized CBT for adults with depression and anxiety across multiple sites, using trained community therapists as guides (Hadjistavropoulos et al., 2014). A study in the UK delivered a computerized self-help program for anxiety and depression, paired with brief telephonic or in-person support, via primary care referral to a stand-alone CCBT clinic (Marks et al., 2003).
From an ethical perspective, benefits and risks for patients exist for both models. A stepped care model provides strong continuity of care, as the designated practitioner refers clients to IGSH and monitors treatment response to “step up” clients' care as needed. Providers can also help connect patients to appropriate local resources in case of an emerging risk situation, such as disclosure of suicidal thoughts or serious self-harm. In contrast, a main advantage of the centralized unit model is that it offers the ability to maintain a consistent standard of service across guides (Drozd et al., 2016). However, providers in the centralized unit model have no previous relationship with patients, are likely to have less access to comprehensive clinical information, and have limited tools available to support their treatment. Given these limitations, it is especially important for centralized units to develop robust risk management policies and procedures. It is worth examining the merits of hybridizing these models to attain benefits inherent to each—for example, by centralizing an IGSH unit while building routine coordination with primary care into their operations.
4.2. Role of guidance
Broadly speaking, the role of guidance in IGSH is to provide a supportive and nonjudgmental environment, encouragement, and promote adherence to treatment through the provision of structure and accountability (Brown & Jones, 2017). Guides also provide clarification about any misunderstandings of the techniques provided (Newman, Erickson, Przeworski, & Dzus, 2003). Means of communication with users may include synchronous (simultaneous) or asynchronous (delayed) communication, a set or a flexible communication schedule, and a variety of media such as phone, email, text, or in-app messaging. Guidance is distinct from psychotherapy in that the online intervention delivers the bulk of the therapeutic content, with the guide serving a secondary support function. Further, whereas a therapist may provide 12–16 hr of face-to-face contact to deliver one round of CBT, it is not uncommon for guides to spend 5–10 min/week supporting and responding to an individual (Newman, Szkodny, Llera, & Przeworski, 2011a, 2011b), which could translate into <1 or 2 hr total time spent on the average user.
The scope of a guide's practice is significantly more limited than that of a therapist's, although the distinction between guidance and therapy may sometimes be challenging to define. For example, if guides are tasked with helping to motivate users, positive reinforcement and reminders fall clearly within this job description. However, consider the example of a user with a generalized anxiety disorder who states she is struggling to engage with a CBT-based IGSH program due to “lack of family support.” Helping her to problem solve may enable her to effectively engage with and benefit from the intervention, but may also require an additional assessment to better understand the family culture, history, and dynamics. Whereas supporting the user in applying problem solving to her situation would likely fall within the scope of practice for a guide, a therapeutic discussion on family history and culture would likely fall within the scope of psychotherapy and may be inappropriate for an IGSH program.
Distinguishing the scope of practice for guidance versus psychotherapy can be especially important when licensed mental health professionals are engaged as guides. Regulators are more likely to claim jurisdiction over services provided to address clinical issues similar to those traditionally presented in therapy, and those that use psychologically robust methods, regardless of whether the service claims to be providing psychotherapy (Harris, 2009). Indeed, direct-to-consumer services often include statements in their terms of service specifying that they are not a substitute for treatment and do not constitute medical or psychological advice. Despite this, regulatory boards may decide that this does not pass the “duck test,” a possibility that is as yet untested legally. As IGSH becomes more common, eventual litigation of these questions seems inevitable, particularly around issues of protecting clients from harm, mandated reporting, and the provision of therapeutic services across state lines (Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, n.d.).
Such concerns pose a challenge for IGSH providers, given potentially divergent interpretations of the nature of guidance and the applicable regulations among jurisdictions. The APA guidelines for practice of telepsychology state that psychologists are responsible for knowing and abiding by requirements of the location in which they are situated, as well as requirements of the states in which their clients are located (American Psychological Association, 2013). Requirements for licensed practitioners can vary dramatically across discipline and from state to state. For example, in Georgia, licensed counselors and social workers must complete a 6-hr course on telehealth competencies before legally engaging in services provided via Internet, telephone, smartphone, or other electronic media; it requires an additional 3 hr of training for telehealth supervisors (Maheu, 2015). Arkansas similarly requires mental health professionals to complete a technology-assisted counseling specialization certification before delivering any form of remote mental health services, whereas Connecticut requires all behavioral health professionals to have access to the patient's medical history including the name and address of the patient's primary care physician before initiating services remotely, including IGSH (State Senate Bill No. 467). On the other hand, if clients in these states are not under the care of a behavioral health professional or in some cases, a licensed health professional, IGSH remote services may be delivered to them with no oversight or stipulations in place.
In addition to defining the scope of practice for guides, including specific task and role boundaries, IGSH programs must determine the appropriate backgrounds and credentials for those providing guidance. Available evidence does not demonstrate a significant improvement in outcomes when guidance is provided by a mental health professional as compared to nonprofessionals, suggesting that nonspecialists can effectively provide this type of support (Brown & Jones, 2017). Unlicensed guides, such as health educators, coaches, or trained laypersons, do not fall under the authority of regulatory boards and could potentially avoid legal complications while being less expensive for IGSH businesses to employ. However, questions remain as to what level and type of supervision and professional oversight should be available to paraprofessional guides to ensure they can adequately support clinically complex or higher risk users. When paraprofessional guides are utilized, they should be supported to work within their scope of competence, and depending on the model, should have access to internal or external resources to refer and escalate higher risk users to the appropriate professionals.
4.3. User selection and screening
A third consideration in developing an IGSH program is defining the target population and deciding how prospective clients are screened and admitted. Typically, guided self-help is considered most appropriate for patients with mild-to-moderate symptoms, given the likely presence of clinical complexity and risk management concerns with more severe presentations (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2011). Users are often referred to IGSH via physicians or other healthcare providers, who may conduct their own screening or assessment to determine whether this level of care is appropriate. Where IGSH is integrated into the care system, this process may be formalized, although outside of such systems providers may simply use their best clinical judgment to refer patients to options based on familiarity, reputation, and availability of resources. In a direct-to-consumer model, prospective users self-identify as likely to benefit from an intervention based on their own self-assessment of the problem, and their own understanding of the IGSH program (usually based on marketing materials). IGSH may also be offered to members of an organization, for example, an employer or school wellness benefit, who then follow a similar path of self-identification and sign up. Prospective users may sign up directly or may be subject to additional screening to determine whether the program is an appropriate fit.
Who are appropriate clients for IGSH? Symptom severity is often cited as an important consideration, with severely impaired or high-risk users typically being screened into more intensive treatment options. However, there is some evidence that higher severity users may also benefit from IGSH interventions. Noting the high percentage (40%) of interested patients that were screened out of an IGSH trial due to exclusion criteria, Hadjistavropoulos et al. (2014) suggested the potential for reaching more patients by reducing exclusion criteria, particularly when coordination of care is available to quickly “step up” users as necessary.
Although IGSH is generally considered a low-risk intervention, an “open to all” policy is subject to potential pitfalls, and inclusion/exclusion criteria should be considered thoughtfully. Patient preference should be one factor in determining whether a technology-based intervention is appropriate, but it should not be the only one (American Psychological Association, 2013) as users may self-select into inappropriate lower-level treatment options due to financial and time constraints, lack of information, stigma, or avoidance. In the authors' experience, providing IGSH programs at a company that provides mobile CBT for anxiety, depression, and disordered eating, allowing for open enrollment into these tracks has at times created unintended consequences. For example, some users have attempted to use exposure therapy modules for inappropriate purposes, such as attempting to increase time spent with a known abuser or to address complex trauma without first establishing adequate coping skills or external support. In other cases, poorly matched users have had a negative first experience with mental health services, potentially decreasing the likelihood that they will seek other empirically supported treatments in the future. On the other hand, it is possible that IGSH may in many cases be a “better than nothing” option for users who would otherwise avoid treatment altogether. This is an important consideration, given that increasing access to care is central to the mission of digital health. For some users, IGSH may also serve as a bridge to other treatment options (White, 1998, 1995).
How do IGSH providers balance accessibility of the service with avoiding negative consequences to less-appropriate users (and the potential of legal risk)? We believe that three main factors should be considered. First, is there empirical support for the use of a given intervention with the targeted population? This may include consideration of clinical, demographic, and cultural factors. Second, are prospective users appropriately informed of the scope and boundaries of the service? Marketing claims should always align with the research, and an informed consent process ensures user understanding. Mental health professionals have long expressed concerns regarding the exponential increase in self-help books and other materials, which are often produced and disseminated without established evidence for their efficacy or appropriateness. Indeed, some psychologists and counselors have called for clearer ethical guidelines regarding professional responsibilities in the selection of self-help books for use with clients. IGSH programs face the same challenges, and arguably raise a more pressing need for regulation given that these programs can be developed and disseminated much more quickly than printed books. For example, it might be prudent to require an age limit for consent to participate and/or parental consent for those below a certain age to ensure personal vetting of content. The American Psychological Association or other organizations could also develop a regulatory body that reviews and provides a stamp of approval for high-quality self-help and guided self-help options. The journal Cognitive and Behavioral Practice which is affiliated with the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies has begun a new initiative to provide reviews of such interventions to help therapists know which ones they should recommend. Finally, there must be protocols in place to identify and support users who are unlikely to benefit from IGSH. This can include guidelines for referral or screening measures used prior to signup, as well as protocols that guides may use to redirect users' behavior within a program, refer them to alternative resources, or escalate them to crisis support as necessary.
Other considerations for prospective IGSH clients include their technology fluency, reading and comprehension ability in the language of the intervention, availability of accommodations for a patient's disability status, and cultural appropriateness of the program (American Psychological Association, 2013). For example, a user who struggles with reading and writing in English (a second language) may find it challenging to process information being presented and may also struggle to communicate these challenges to a coach. In a worst-case scenario, concerning risk factors may go overlooked due to communication challenges. Likewise, users who are new to using app-based technology may experience frustration, lack of motivation, and hopelessness in their struggle to work through a mobile program, and may also be challenged to communicate these struggles to a guide through the Web app. These issues are nontrivial as they can disrupt users' core ability to benefit from an IGSH program. In fact, the state of Delaware requires assessment of technology fluency and the need for disability accommodations as part of their requirements for prescribing a telehealth solution (Epstein Becker Green, 2016).
The APA practice guidelines for telepsychology require that psychologists adhere to the same standard of care when providing services online, and furthermore suggests that psychologists should take extra care in assessing prospective clients for remote services given their relative newness and rapid evolution (American Psychological Association, 2013). In practice, assessments to determine user appropriateness for a given IGSH intervention may range from a thorough, in-person, or video-based diagnostic interview with a licensed practitioner, to a brief screening questionnaire offered directly through the IGSH application itself. Symptom inventories and risk-screener questions can easily be deployed in the latter scenario, although a professional assessment is better equipped to identify issues such as a cognitive disability or cultural mismatch between an IGSH intervention and the prospective user's needs. Again, this trade-off illustrates the tension between the robustness of assessment in the referral process and the accessibility and scalability of IGSH services.
4.4. Takeaways
The way an IGSH program chooses to define its scope—including decisions around its chosen model, role of guidance, and target audience—sets the stage for ethical practice and will have a profound impact on how clinical risk is managed as discussed below. In this emerging practice area, we look to researchers and our ethical and regulatory bodies to investigate and promote empirically supported best practices. In particular, the resolution of jurisdictional issues is a high priority. In addition, professional organizations must update their telehealth practice standards to adapt to changing technologies. A recurring theme in ethical decision making in the IGSH format is navigating the tension between supporting the scalability and accessibility of online services, and the robustness of safeguards against unintended negative consequences.
5. MANAGING CLINICAL RISK

Whenever a mental health service is offered, a proportion of distressed individuals can be expected to present with some risk of danger to themselves or others. Risk may be imminent, such as users disclosing their intention to take their own lives, or can be chronic, in the case of a user with ongoing passive suicidal ideation, feelings of hopelessness, and recurrent struggles with substance abuse. Other risk factors may be external, such as users who disclose that they are in physically abusive relationships. Managing risk is both an ethical issue and a legal issue to the organization offering IGSH and the guide; however, being at the frontlines of the intervention, the guide is the person most likely to interact with and make case-by-case decisions around risk management.
The model and framework of the IGSH program have a significant impact on the resources available to guides as they manage risk. One decision point to consider is the provision of anonymous services versus verification of users' identities. Given the ongoing stigma toward mental health services, anonymity continues to hold a significant draw for individuals who may be unwilling or unable to seek other treatment. Anonymity is also congruent with many people's expectations for receiving support online more generally (e.g., via peer support forums). On the other hand, the provision of anonymous services has created ethical and practical concerns for online practitioners; an issue explored not only in professional spaces (Ferguson, 2016; Maheu, 2011; Novotney, 2017) but also as a matter of urgent concern in the popular media (Ferguson, 2016). Anonymity can present serious challenges when users are in crisis, endorsing a serious danger to themselves or others, or sharing information that would trigger a mandated report. No practitioner or organization wants to be in the position of being unable to intervene when a user discloses imminent suicidality or discloses a child is involved in ongoing abuse. In addition to the consequences to IGSH users, in most states, failure by a mandated reporter to report abuse can result in civil and criminal penalties, with fines up to $10,000 and/or a jail sentence of up to 5 years.
At this time, offering users some degree of anonymity is a common practice for online mental health services. Even when no other information is collected about a user, IP addresses can often be obtained for the purpose of attempting to initiate a police welfare check. However, these can be unreliable sources of location data (e.g., if a user is logging in through a VPN). IGSH providers may also offer anonymity by creating a firewall between users and guides, while collecting information that may be deployed in an emergency “break the glass” situation. When companies collect billing information directly from users, they are likely to have access to a full name, address, and email address. In our experience, there is a great deal of variability in child protection agencies' ability and willingness to receive reports from IGSH providers with limited identifying information. In one California county, for example, this author was able to file a Child Protective Services report providing only a first name and IP address; in another county, a report of a young child being hit by a parent was declined on the basis of insufficient identifying information, despite providing a full name and email address indicating a specific university affiliation.
The choice of synchronous versus asynchronous services also impacts how risk is managed. For example, in a real-time conversation, an ambiguous statement such as “I'm so humiliated I feel like dying” would likely trigger a clarifying question to ascertain whether the user was experiencing suicidal ideation or expressing herself hyperbolically. However, in an asynchronous conversation, the guide may not read such a message for hours or even days and may wait even longer to receive a response to a follow-up question. This is clearly not a viable time frame for conducting a risk assessment in a potential crisis. Therefore, it is important that participants in asynchronous IGSH programs are made aware of resources they can contact in case of a crisis situation—for example, their physician's on-call service or designated crisis hotlines on their health plan. Outside of a coordinated care system, an alternative is to develop a protocol for when and how guides (or other representatives of the IGSH programs) can engage clients in a real-time conversation. For example, a designated crisis coordinator could be available on-call to proactively outreach and respond to risk. A final option is to refer users to a general crisis hotline for additional assessment, such as a national or local suicide hotline. This option is free and widely accessible, although there is no way to ensure or verify that users receive the guide's referral message in a timely manner.
To illustrate some of the issues at hand, consider the hypothetical case of a user who signed up for a program advertised online, which offers a subscription-based stress management program with guidance provided by a licensed, master-level clinician. This user discloses in his first message to the guide that he is currently seeking support around work stress. Over the course of the next few weeks, it emerges that the user has been previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder, and although he has been stable for the past year, his mood has been low recently. A month into the IGSH program, the user reports that he has discontinued medication, and his messages include some bizarre and ambiguous statements related to death and dying. The guide sends a message referring the user back to his physician and urges him to call 911 or walk into the ER if he is experiencing suicidal thoughts. The user, however, does not appear to have viewed the message and has had no further contact with the guide.
In this scenario, what responsibility does the guide (and more broadly, the IGSH program) have for the safety and well-being of this user? The user has not indicated a specific and imminent threat to himself that would very clearly indicate the need for police intervention, but the content of his messages and mental health history clearly indicate the possibility of a current crisis. In the therapist role, online or offline, responsible clinicians would likely make multiple attempts to follow-up on the dropout of a decompensating client with multiple known risk factors. Therapists may attempt contact via various means of communication, such as secure email, telephone, or even snail mail. They would also likely have emergency contact information and/or a release to speak with the prescribing physician, enabling them to reach out to an ally to ensure the client's safety. A guide, on the other hand, is not likely to have access to some or any of these resources. Even if a name and address are available, triggering a police welfare check is an invasive option, which requires a substantial violation of privacy, and should only be invoked when necessary to prevent immediate harm.
How does a guide navigate this scenario responsibly and with the best interests of her user in mind? There is no easy answer that balances user safety with privacy and maintenance of the guide's unique role. As demonstrated here, risk management cannot begin reactively at the level of the guide; decisions about the program's model and the user selection and assessment strategies discussed in previous sections directly impact how risk is addressed. For example, if this user was accessing the program through a stepped care model, the guide could access support or coordinate care with his prescribing physician or primary care team. A more thorough assessment prior to starting the program could have alerted the guide to potential risk factors, and a safety agreement could have been developed at the outset of the IGSH treatment.
A final clinical risk issue to consider is how to manage treatment failure in the case of worsening symptoms or failure to improve. Psychologists have a responsibility to monitor response to an intervention on an ongoing basis and must adjust or terminate services they believe are not helping or are harming the client. They should provide referrals or help the user connect with alternative services, as appropriate (American Psychological Association, 2013). Although this can be a murky and subjective question for in-person therapists as well, here it is further complicated by the self-determined pacing of many IGSH programs; 4 weeks of participation in a program could look very different depending on whether a user was logging on daily or biweekly. The re-assessment of user progress may be done on a time-bound schedule or based on progress through the intervention. Where program access is based on a monthly subscription, it may benefit users to make IGSH programs time delimited as a matter of course, rather than allowing for indefinite participation over the course of months and years, while also allowing for the option to extend a program flexibly for a given user's situation as needed.
5.1. Takeaways
Handling clinical risk in the context of an IGSH program poses unique challenges related to the format and structure of communication and the ability to access or not access crisis resources. Given that proponents of IGSH have emphasized accessibility of care as a guiding principle. An additional challenge is how to balance this value with potential harm posed by anonymous care or the reduction in other barriers to care, such as strict exclusion criteria or formal assessment. As this field grows, it is worth noting that a risk calculus may look different in the context of large-scale systems and the high-user volume that IGSH programs aspire to serve—an unlikely adverse event in a research study becomes a statistical inevitability when systems are serving hundreds of thousands or millions of users, meaning that programs and guides must be well-prepared and supported to address them.
6. RISKS, BENEFITS, AND INFORMED CONSENT

Informed consent is considered the primary means by which psychologists protect patients' rights to privacy and choice of care that we are obliged to uphold (American Psychological Association, 2010; Fisher, 2017); it is a foundation of ethical practice whose importance cannot be overstated. Required components of informed consent include information about the nature and anticipated course of the intervention, fees, the involvement of third parties, and confidentiality, including rights and limitations. Services provided online, such as IGSH, are subject to additional guidelines related to associate unique risks and benefits.
Compared to offline treatment options, IGSH may offer significant advantages in terms of convenience and accessibility; compared to unguided self-help, it offers increased likelihood of treatment adherence and improved outcomes. However, it may also be uniquely vulnerable from a confidentiality and data security perspective. The APA Telepsychology Task Force identified patients' understanding of increased risks to security and confidentiality, as well as steps being taken to protect confidential data, as being critical to informed consent (American Psychological Association, 2013). Part of the informed consent discussion should include education for users about steps they can take on their end to protect their own information safety. This may include setting a secure password that they do not share with others, logging out between sessions, and how to turn email or push notifications on and off. If users are not comfortable with the limitations presented by IGSH, they should be provided with access or referrals to an offline treatment option.
Service disruptions due to power failure, bugs, and Internet outages also warrant special consideration. Although these may be considered mere annoyances in some industries, when technology is used to provide emotional and psychological support, these unexpected disruptions can have a significant negative impact on users' well-being. Consider, for example, users who regularly rely on their guides to help talk them out of doing something impulsive or dangerous, or who are suddenly in need of grounding techniques to ride out urges to self-injure. The informed consent process provides an opportunity to prepare users for the possibility of service disruptions and develop a plan to access secondary support services in such situations.
Informed consent should be conceptualized as a dynamic process that involves coming to an understanding with patients; the signed document (or its digital equivalent) should be viewed as documentation of this mutual understanding, rather than as the agreement itself (American Psychological Association, 2010). To that end, informed consent should be presented in a way that is accessible and understandable to the layperson. This traditionally involves discussion of terms at the outset of the first session, as well as a review of the relevant paperwork. However, it is not a one-time event, and the agreement should be revisited as necessary throughout the intervention. Examples of this ongoing process could include clarifying the boundaries of a guide's role if a user appears unclear, or negotiating a safety plan in collaboration with the PCP that allows a patient to safely continue in the IGSH program.
Preserving the spirit of informed consent in the IGSH format presents new challenges and opportunities. To the extent possible, having live, in-person discussions with prospective users is the least risky, allowing for easy, in-the-moment responses to clarifications and questions. It also allows providers to more easily verify users' understanding, or pick up on verbal or nonverbal cues indicating confusion. However, depending on the program model, this will not always be possible. Other options include offering an introductory phone call or providing a video or written introduction prior to beginning the intervention. These last two options should be crafted with care to use simple, clear language and avoid legal or technical jargon, and should include some pathway to seek additional information or clarification. One example of an innovative informed consent procedure for an online depression study combined custom YouTube videos with written material, and tested each user's understanding via a quiz that addressed the voluntary nature of the study, and the fact that participants would be randomly assigned (Anguera, Jordan, Castaneda, Gazzaley, & Arean, 2016). Following initial consent, it fell to the guide to maintain ongoing consent throughout the intervention.
6.1. Takeaways
The requirement to obtain informed consent is not fulfilled by simply having IGSH users agree to a terms of service agreement online. This format requires creative solutions that help users understand what they are agreeing to, and empower them to make decisions about their treatment. Requirements regarding telehealth informed consent vary from state to state, and organizations engaged in interjurisdictional practice are responsible to be aware of laws in any state they serve, both generally and specifically, regarding providing online services. For a comprehensive account of laws regulating telehealth in all 50 states, see Epstein Becker Green (2016).
7. MOVING FORWARD

7.1. Resolving jurisdictional issues
One of the most exciting promises of IGSH technology is its potential to reach a large number of people at low cost to health care systems and consumers. However, jurisdictional issues discussed above are likely to present significant challenges to IGSH programs' ability to scale at a national level in the USA. Clinicians and supervisors cannot realistically be expected to obtain licenses in fifty states, and maintaining a workforce of locally licensed providers in every state is prohibitive for all but the largest companies. This could impact access in states that are more rural and have less overall access to mental health care.
We posit that the current system is overly restrictive without significantly improving public safety and are concerned that the best interests of IGSH users will not always be well-served by the most obvious workaround—hiring only unlicensed guides such as health coaches or peers who are not subject to the same oversight. Legal solutions such as the Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT), an interstate compact which would permit cross-state provision of telehealth services by licensed psychologists among member states (Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, n.d), are in the works, but implementation and widespread adoption are still years away. We applaud this effort and encourage professionals from other disciplines to prioritize similar legislation to allow for online practice across state lines.
7.2. Defining practice standards
Although IGSH falls broadly under the telehealth umbrella, practice guidelines for telehealth in the USA and abroad tend to focus more on “traditional” video-based telepsychology services. We are excited to be on the cutting edge of applying new technologies, but are also sometimes challenged to translate existing ethical guidelines to this format. Questions such as the appropriate credentials of guides and their supervisors; what levels of pathology can be safely and appropriately addressed using IGSH; and how to screen and monitor risk effectively throughout an intervention require additional empirical attention. The telehealth community would benefit if researchers agreed to share a higher level of detail in describing IGSH programs, such as specifics about guidance provided, supervisory structure, and risk management procedures in place, such that clinicians and technology innovators can learn from these and use data to develop best practices. We also call on professional organizations and state boards to broaden their understanding of telehealth to include IGSH and other emerging technologies and create or utilize existing task forces to examine these issues in greater depth. It is essential that organizations and clinicians have ethics resources that keep pace with technologies' rapid growth and change.
7.3. Collaboration across disciplines
Finally, we believe that psychologists and other mental health professionals have a responsibility to collaborate effectively with professionals from other fields—engineers, product managers, marketers, content writers, designers, and others—who make IGSH programs work and disseminate them to the world. Our experience working on mental health technology has revealed cultural differences between these fields that have at times been a challenge to navigate. Anyone who has provided healthcare in a for-profit setting is familiar with the tension that can emerge between providing highest quality of care and making the best business decision. Similarly, psychologists working in technology settings will inevitably experience tension between offering a program that is clinically and ethically solid with the need for an agile model that allows for rapid iteration. When mental health professionals work in the technology field, it is their responsibility to ensure the IGSH programs they offer are rooted in science and executed in an ethical manner. To do this, they must develop a working understanding of the language, needs, and values of the tech industry. They must also be alert to areas in which their colleagues need education and information regarding the mental health field. On the flip side, it is imperative that health tech companies not only elicit critical feedback from psychologists (and representatives of the relevant ethical or regulatory bodies), but also meaningfully integrate them into the decision-making structures.
8. CONCLUSION

With technological innovation in the mental space, rapid growth has led to growing pains. Although IGSH has a strong clinical evidence base, we are still in the early stages of examining ethical considerations that arise delivering mental health services in this new format. This article aimed to provide a preliminary review of these issues. Taken together, we find that IGSH programs are empowered to provide safe and ethical care when they (a) coordinate care and risk management effectively with other systems; (b) provide guidance that is competent and well-defined; and (c) reach users that are appropriate for and well-educated about the services they are going to receive. In operationalizing these goals, providers must grapple with the tension between furthering the mission of improving access to care for all, and instituting robust practices to address less-common risks to IGSH users. We hope that this review will spark discussion, debate, and further innovation as we work toward developing an industry standard for IGSH intervention.",
"26": "The introduction of technology into psychological practice creates wonderful opportunities but also uncertainties and skepticism. In their “Technology use in mental health practice and research: Legal and ethical risks,” Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) zero in on both sides of this new coin. We are pleased to offer a few reflections on these accelerating technological developments and particularly on organized psychology's copious responses to them. We employ the term telepsychology rather than the more generic technology or telehealth as the American Psychological Association (2013) has approved the former as a distinct term within the psychological community for technology-based tools.
Is it, in fact, a new coin? During a workshop several months ago, one of us was asked, “I've been using the telephone to talk with patients since 1967; am I practicing telepsychology?” The answer was an unequivocal “yes.” Any communication through electronic means has been recognized by all health organizations as telecommunication.
Advances in technology, new means of transmission, the ubiquity of technology in society, and the level of integration into psychological practice and research have raised the bar far beyond telephone use. Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) capture the complexities of technology's entry into psychological practice and identify several elements of traditional practice that are most significantly influenced: training, ethics, legal aspects, and technology.
1. TRAINING

The lead article notes that formal training is not required by the Standards of Accreditation for Health Service Psychology (APA, 2015) and is not informally taught in psychology graduate programs. Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) are unequivocally correct on the first point; we are equivocal on their second point as virtually no research has been conducted on informal training practices.
At the same time, telepsychology is defined as an extension of traditional practice and research rather than a specialty area. The discipline-specific knowledge, profession-wide competencies, and learning/curriculum elements required by accreditation (e.g., ethics, assessment, intervention, diversity, research) are those that are necessary to minimally function as a licensed psychologist. Forensics, neuropsychology, and consulting psychology, for example, are variations from general practice that require training beyond what is required to competently practice as a psychologist. That is, telepsychology is not meant to apply to a discrete category of psychologists differently than all licensed psychologists. In fact, the major concerns of competence, standards of care, confidentiality, storage and transmission, boundaries, and welfare of others voiced by Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) are key elements of the APA Ethics Code (2017) for all professional activities. Telepsychology is an extension of these existing standards rather than a new area of practice and research. Interjurisdictional practice is the sole exception.
What does this framing mean regarding clinical training? It is certainly reasonable that telepsychology be taught in graduate programs, and Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) assert that the subject should, in fact, be included in doctoral-level ethics courses.
Psychologists can still practice without the ancillary use of telepsychology with the exception of use of the telephone. Use of telecommunications is still a choice and not an integral part of practice, which largely explains the absence of telepsychology in required training.
The internship training experience, however, typically includes telecommunications. Psychology interns are routinely taught the types, complexities, and methods of telepsychology. For example, the Veterans Administration in Seattle, Washington deploys mobile videoconference units to the northwestern part of the state in service to the Native American populations. The VA psychologists and interns located in Seattle remotely provide the psychological services from their offices. The VA, the Department of Defense, and major medical centers are examples of training sites that include telepractice and in the process obviously train students on the job.
Licensed psychologists often expand their scope of practice in their careers well after completion of formal graduate training. Education in technology will take a similar path as those expanding their scope of practice into working with children, conducting neuropsychological assessments, or treating eating disorders. Most frequently, these new competencies are gained through continuing education, consultation, and/or supervision.
A psychologist developing a new competency would typically undergo extensive continuing education (e.g., workshops, webinars) and acquire consultation or supervision for initial practice in the new competency. The consultation or supervision for practice in telepsychology would typically include ensuring clinical competence via telecommunication as different from in-person services and ensuring competence in security for transmission and storage of data.
Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) correctly note the absence of formal education for telepsychology. The day may well come when psychologists cannot practice without telepsychology. At that time, their recommendation for required training may be realized, but that day is not upon us yet.
2. ETHICS

Lustgarten and Elhai (2018, pp. 19–20) assert that “the American Psychological Association has not yet outlined standards of care, competencies, or expectations for training….” We sharply disagree; those authors do not see what we see—literally. We believe that organized psychology has proactively responded to technology in mental health and that APA has indeed outlined those considerations, in 2013.
In that year, APA adopted the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, which unfortunately are not referenced in the lead article. Guidelines must be specific enough to be useful, yet broad enough to apply to all psychologists practicing in the guideline area. The guidelines, in keeping with the aim of telepsychology as an extension of conventional practice, address (a) standards of care, (b) competency, (c) informed consent, (d) confidentiality, (e) security and transmission of data, (f) disposal of data, (g) testing and assessment, and (h) interjurisdictional practice. The first seven telepsychology guidelines have corresponding ethical standards in the APA Ethics Code (e.g., competence, confidentiality, informed consent). The intention of this framework is to reinforce psychologists in maintaining their core adherence to in-person standards of care while being aware that telepractice might affect any of these standards.
For example, how does telepractice effect informed consent? One would retain the elements of an in-person informed consent and add content addressing (a) remote emergency services, (b) billing variations from in-person service, (c) confidentiality limitations not applicable to in-person services, and (d) means of storing and disposal of e-mails, texts, and videoconferences. These and other ethical principles are addressed in APA's A telepsychology casebook: Using technology ethically and effectively in your professional practice (Campbell, Millan, & Martin, 2018).
Guidelines are meant to assist psychologists in achieving best practices and standards of care, yet are not enforceable. Increasingly, states are incorporating these guidelines in whole or in part into their rules and regulations, which are then enforceable.
APA has also been centrally involved in telepsychology in other ways, such as alerting its members, publishing books, and offering webinars. A major revision of the APA Ethics Code is underway. Most assuredly, telepsychology will have a more developed presence in the new code than is currently the case.
Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) raise important aspects of competence and how knowledge and skills are impacted by the introduction of telepractice. We believe that competence expands in telepsychology into four variations:
Clinical competency: Diagnostic accuracy or treatment selection may not prove as effective when practice is conducted electronically. Psychologists cannot assume, for example, that their DBT treatment will have the same outcome as their in-person practice.
Technology competency: Psychologists are responsible for acquiring competence in technology hardware, software, and other devices of intended use.
Client/patient competency: Although psychologists are not responsible for directly teaching clients about technology, psychologists must nonetheless be confident that clients possess sufficient skills to participate in telepractice given, for example, confidentiality requirements and security concerns (e.g., firewalls, encryption, password protection).
Cultural competency: Psychologists must assess the effect of language, family involvement, cultural practices, and contextual beliefs that can be altered when not face to face.
We congratulate Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) for eloquently discussing standards of care within their section on “Welfare.” When services are conducted remotely, psychologists no longer have control of the environment. External factors are uncontrolled, yet psychologists are responsible for maintaining standards of care in these expanded environments. Following are three examples of Lustgarten and Elhai's (2018) observations:
Emergencies: Psychologists are familiar with emergency services for their in-person practice; however, when the client is in a remote location, psychologists remain responsible for ensuring clients are familiar with their local services.
Immediate environment: Are there other people in the room? Are there distractions (e.g., pet and television noise from outside the room)? Is the technology device shared by others in the household? Could someone else in the house be listening?
Best practices: Is telepractice the best choice for the client? Psychologists assess whether a particular client will benefit as much from treatment electronically as in person. Client factors include diagnostic considerations, interpersonal competences, willingness and ability to engage in the treatment plan, and technological savvy.
We respectfully disagree with Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) on a particular point regarding confidentiality. They present confidentiality and privacy as companion factors several times in their article. We assert that there is virtually no privacy in electronic communication and only limited confidentiality, which would need to be defined in the informed consent. Further, confidentiality is a commitment by psychologists not to reveal information received from clients. Privacy is a term born of the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and refers to the right to be secure in one's person, house, papers, and effects against unreasonable search by the government. Privacy certainly is relevant to unwarranted wiretapping, hacking personal information, and other intrusions; however, information introduced into a public electronic forum (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) is not secure.
We commend Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) for their thorough discussion of the importance of choosing hardware, software, and other technology-based tools that comply with federal regulations. Moreover, we congratulate them for alerting readers to the variable level of security offered by the third-party providers (e.g., Apple, Google, Microsoft) and advising them to use dedicated hardware and software only for service sessions. These recommendations are among the most important considerations in telepsychology.
3. LEGAL ASPECTS

Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) identify federal policies and regulations that impact psychological services, primarily the Health Information Privacy and Accountability Act (HIPAA), the Health Information and Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH), and the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). The purpose of these regulations is to safeguard the access, maintenance, and transmission of Protected Health Information (PHI). Protected Health Information includes health status, provision of health care, payment for health care or information collected by psychologists. Understanding of these requirements is essential in meeting the standards of care. These regulations must also be met by psychologists who are not engaging in telepractice but who transmit client health information to insurance companies electronically.
Psychologists are rightfully concerned about the legalities of telepractice pertaining to jurisdictional boundaries and the right to practice. Currently, all states but one allow temporary practice if a psychologist or patient is in that remote state (one in which the psychologist is not licensed). Temporary practice typically is defined as 30 days. Although the American Medical Association has determined that services take place in the location of the patient, the location of practice or service delivery, as determined by the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), is the location of the psychologist, not the client. Further, most states have either reciprocity or an endorsement status in which psychologists who are already licensed in good standing in another state will receive expedited processing.
The ASPPB is developing an interstate agreement and network titled Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT, www.asppb.net/page/PSYPACT). When enacted by at least seven states, PSYPACT-participating licensing boards will allow psychologists living in any the participant jurisdictions to telepractice in any of the other states with only a license in one of the states. In-person practice would continue to require a license in the jurisdiction where the client resides. These efforts by ASPPB, supported by the APA Practice Organization, are intended to facilitate the practice of telepsychology.
4. TECHNOLOGY

The incorporation of technology into practice is a significant undertaking and involves complex, specific risk management practices over and above in-person practice. Below we punctuate a few areas of technology consideration.
4.1. Security
Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) thoroughly describe the centrality and means of securing data transmissions. Their article highlights the use of encrypted e-mail and other methods of preventing access to data. Nonsecure networks (such as those available in public locations) are vulnerable as well as nonpassword-protected WiFi. Use of public Internet cafés and smartphones in public locations substantially increases access by third parties. The lead article provides a table of recommendations for use of technology in practice and research that addresses each of these vulnerabilities.
4.2. Telepsychology methods
Videoconferencing is far superior to other nonvisual means of telepractice and will prove the probable goal for psychologists planning to have a telepractice. The majority of psychologists who use e-mail and texts espouse to only use these for informational purposes (e.g., appointments). A recent informal poll of the Association of Psychology Training Clinics members asked whether training clinics allowed the use of texting. Approximately 25 clinical directors answered “absolutely not” and three answered “yes with restrictions.”
We return to Lustgarten and Elhai's (2018) sagacious warning about losing control when the practice leaves the office and enters the external environment. Information and communication are now only a click away. Consider the case of a psychologist with a written policy of only accepting texts over the weekend if an appointment needs to be changed. If that psychologist received, over the weekend, a client text with a suicidal or homicidal threat, the fact that the client went beyond the therapist's parameters would probably not be convincing in a negligence or malpractice suit. Pandora's (electronic) box has been opened.
4.3. Social media
Social media is a blessing and a curse, but mostly a curse from an ethics perspective. Those entering the profession of psychology who have grown up with social media communication are challenged to superimpose confidentiality, secure communication, and multiple roles over the open access to which they have become accustomed.
We ask our graduate students to respond to this statement, “Social media exists for the purpose of self-disclosure.” Most students disagree initially and offer examples of receiving news via apps, and it is true that many people receive news from Facebook (even if initiated by Russian operatives). After we note that receiving news is unidirectional and not interactive, the student discussion soon turns to the subject of self-disclosure. Psychologists who did not grow up with social media typically superimpose electronic communication over a sound foundation of ethical practice and may struggle with the technology. By contrast, those already steeped in technology typically struggle with pulling in the reins on open access in their communication to incorporate ethics and standards of care into their professional practices.
5. CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

Love it, hate it, or terminally ambivalent about it, technology is here to stay in mental health practice and research. We commend Lustgarten and Elhai (2018) for comprehensively explicating both the virtues and the risks of telepsychology and sagely offering recommendations for countering many vulnerabilities. Contrary to their statements and implications, however, we are convinced that organized psychology through APA has proactively responded to telepsychology and will continue to do so. In the end, the purposes of both the lead article and this commentary are to inform clinical psychologists in their consideration of telepsychology and to enhance their effective care of patients.",
"27": "Borgueta and colleagues (Borgueta, Purvis, & Newman, 2018) convincingly describe in their article how the field of mental health treatment is changing rapidly through the introduction of new technologies and how ethical guidelines have not kept up with the pace of these changes. This is an important issue that should be taken up by the field, and the authors give clear guidelines about what should be done and which subjects deserve priority.
In this commentary, I want to focus on two issues that are related to the article by Borgueta and colleagues. The first is that the issues raised about the ethics of Internet-based guided self-help are not limited to Internet interventions and are just as relevant for the whole field of guided self-help, which goes back to the 1960s. If the ethical issues would have been addressed at that time, it would not be much of a problem now. The second issue is more fundamental in the sense that the principle of guided self-help is that the patient is leading the intervention, not the therapist, which implies that responsibilities are taken over by the patient. This changes the perspective of responsibilities and risks.
1. GUIDED SELF-HELP: DIFFERENT WHEN APPLIED THROUGH THE INTERNET?

The first point is that the issues described by the authors of this article are not limited to technology-based interventions. In my view, the issues raised in this article are more related to the question of who leads the intervention, the patient, or the therapist. And from that perspective, I want to point to the larger literature on self-help and guided self-help, which goes back to the 1960s. It was no more than 10 years after exposure was introduced as an intervention for anxiety-based avoidance in the 1950s that self-help interventions were developed, wherein the patient received instructions for how to apply exposure to him or herself using, for example, a long-play record or tape (e.g., Kahn & Baker, 1968). The idea was that the knowledge about how to treat anxiety through exposure was easy and straightforward enough for patients to apply to themselves. Good instructions and education about how to apply a therapy would allow patients to do this independently. Not much later, many other self-help therapies were developed and tested in randomized trials, including therapies for depression, other forms of anxiety, insomnia, alcohol problems, sexual problems, weight loss, and many others. And at that time, this emerging field also raised discussion of ethical issues (Rosen, 1987).
The idea of these interventions was that the patient works through the intervention by him- or herself and the therapist or coach only helped and supported the patient with working through the materials (Cuijpers & Schuurmans, 2007). These materials could be written down in a book, recorded on a record or tape, broadcasted on television, or could be explained in Internet-based interventions. There is, however, no basic difference between the Internet on the one hand or books, records, or television on the other. The idea is that the patient is in the lead, not the therapist.
So from that perspective, the ethical issues described by Borgueta and colleagues are not new and actually go back about 50 years, when the first studies on self-help were conducted. This makes the unresolved ethical issues described by Borgueta and colleagues even more urgent. There is a large body of research showing that guided self-help can be effective in the treatment of mental health problems, but this knowledge has hardly been used in mental health care, nor have the ethical issues of using these treatments been worked out.
2. WHO IS IN THE LEAD, THE PATIENT OR THE THERAPIST?

In their article, Borgueta and colleagues focus on the risks when a patient works through a guided self-help intervention and the responsibilities that are placed on the therapist or coach who supports them. Borgueta and colleagues look at this issue from the perspective of a “conventional” mental health-care provider, who takes the responsibility for the treatment of the patient. The mental health-care provider is responsible for his or her safety and the decisions that are made during the treatment. However, one can also take a different view.
The central principle of guided self-help is that the patient leads the intervention and the coach only supports the patient in working through the self-help materials. The therapist is not in the traditional therapist role because there is no “therapeutic relationship” in the strict sense; thus, “coach” may be a better term for the role that the mental health provider assumes in this case. This coach does not take responsibility for the treatment, just checks whether the patient works through the treatment correctly and answers questions of the patient. Borgueta and colleagues describe this position and indicate that regulatory boards have not yet decided whether this passes the “duck test.” This is, in my view, the best position to take when thinking about (Internet based) guided self-help. That self-help is not a regular treatment should be clear from the beginning. And it should also be made clear that it is the responsibility of the patient to seek more typical psychotherapy when things are not going well and he or she does not improve over time. A self-help intervention cannot replace more usual forms of psychological treatment and this should be made clear from the beginning.
This situation is similar to buying a self-help book in a bookstore; it is impossible to forbid patients to read such books to see if this approach can help to solve their problems. The only difference is that in guided self-help, there is someone to help with the use of the book. But then, it is still the decision and the responsibility of the patient to seek treatment when he or she does not feel well or when things do not improve.
But as Borgueta and colleagues highlight, it is indeed not clear yet whether regulatory boards will decide whether this position is defensible. Personally, I have been working using guided self-help approaches for people with mental health problems outside the regular mental health-care treatment system since the early 1990s. And these ethical issues came up regularly when talking to colleagues, patients, and policymakers, without a clear consensus. My work at that time was always local and on a small scale, but that changed when I was involved in the development of a television series and self-help book for depression in the Netherlands. Both the book and the television series were based on the “Coping with Depression” course, a psychoeducational intervention based on cognitive and behavioral approaches that was developed by Pete Lewinsohn. There were a considerable number of studies showing the beneficial effects of this intervention, for both treatment and prevention of depression (Cuijpers, Muñoz, Clarke, & Lewinsohn, 2009). There was much interest from the public and mental health professionals; the television series was watched by several hundred thousand people and tens of thousands of copies of the book were sold. The ethical issues were raised by several people, but still no formal decision was made about the ethical limitations and roles of this type of intervention. So maybe now, with the broader introduction of Internet interventions, these discussions will once again be raised and hopefully solved.
3. CONCLUSION

I still do not know whether opponents of this self-help movement were right and we should not have made this television series on the “Coping with Depression” course. These opponents would now certainly also argue that it is not ethical to deliver guided self-help through the Internet outside the regular mental health care system. Personally, I think we should inform patients as thoroughly as possible about methods that may be of help to them and that are simple enough to be explained and used by nonprofessionals. I do not think we should hide this knowledge behind a professional wall, but make it accessible to anyone who may benefit from this type of intervention. Of course, we have to deliver care in a safe way that does not harm patients, but we also have the obligation to help as many people as we can. And if we can do that by providing them with knowledge about how to apply a treatment to themselves, we should not hesitate to do that. The disease burden of mental disorders is too large for that, both on the personal level of the patient and on the level of our societies.",
"28": "The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic will likely produce widespread psychological distress as people all around the world struggle with fear of infection, social isolation, disruption to daily routines, economic hardship, and serious illness or death of friends and family (Gruber et al., 2020). Although most people who initially experience high levels of distress in the wake of disasters eventually return to their usual level functioning (Goldmann & Galea, 2014; Norris et al., 2002), some individuals develop chronic and severe mental disorders, including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), major depressive disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and substance use disorders (Goldmann & Galea, 2014; Norris et al., 2002; Sayed, Iacoviello, & Charney, 2015). The current pandemic may produce more chronic symptoms than most disasters because of its unpredictability, its unknown duration, the lack of cues for differentiating safety from danger (e.g., it may be difficult to determine if others are infected), the high level of social and economic disruption, and the high number of fatalities (Gruber et al., 2020).
The need to stem the spread of infection has sharply limited mental health providers’ ability to provide in-person care, precisely at a time when there is an increased need for proactive prevention and treatment. In accordance with government requests to stay at home and physically distance from others, mental health care providers have shifted to delivering care via clinical video teleconferencing and telephone modalities, often referred to collectively as telemental health. For many decades, the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) has used telemental health to provide a range of services (e.g., therapy, medication management) to veterans enrolled in the VHA system, particularly to rural veterans for whom driving to a facility would be a barrier to care (Adams et al., 2019; Bumgarner et al., 2017). These telemental health methods, once considered secondary to in-person care, have become critical and central to delivering psychological support to veterans during the pandemic.
This article describes how VHA dramatically increased its telemental health services in the opening days of the COVID-19 pandemic by leveraging its existing infrastructure and prior planning. The rapid scale-up of telehealth to provide mental health care in the wake of a public health crisis posed numerous challenges (Kruse et al., 2018). Lessons learned from VHA’s effort can inform other organizations’ expansion of telemental health in response to the pandemic. The sections that follow summarize clinical research on the effectiveness of telemental health, discuss VHA’s expansion of telemental health care immediately after the outbreak, and identify facilitators of and barriers to that expansion. The final section reviews the ongoing challenges that VHA and other mental health care organizations may need to address when expanding telemental health services during and after this pandemic.
Effectiveness of Telemental Health

Telemental Health via Video
A growing body of research, much of it involving veterans, has examined the use of video telemental health to overcome geographic and logistical barriers to care. The first studies focused on office-based video psychotherapy, that is, when a patient travels to a local clinic and connects to a provider at a different clinic to get services that are not available locally. Research then expanded to examine in-home telemental health via video, which reduces travel, logistical, and time barriers to care even more than office-based video.
Rigorous studies have tested whether clinical video teleconferencing is as effective as in-person care. Psychiatric management via office-based video produced outcomes similar to in-person psychiatric treatment in one noninferiority study (O’Reilly et al., 2007) and in two other randomized trials (De Las Cuevas, Arredondo, Cabrera, Sulzenbacher, & Meise, 2006; Ruskin et al., 2004). Video telepsychotherapy proved to be noninferior to (as effective as) office-based in-person psychotherapy in seven trials involving veterans with PTSD (Acierno et al., 2016, 2017; Morland et al., 2010, 2014, 2015, 2020) and older adults with depression (Egede et al., 2015), but not in an eighth trial with veterans with PTSD (Liu et al., 2019). Other trials and pilot studies have demonstrated the feasibility of using home-based video for treating obsessive–compulsive disorder (e.g., Goetter, Herbert, Forman, Yuen, & Thomas, 2014), panic disorder (Bouchard et al., 2004), and social anxiety disorder (Yuen et al., 2013). This research on home-based video is particularly relevant to mental health care during the COVID-19 pandemic because it indicates that it is feasible to deliver high-quality, evidence-based care to patients who want it without requiring them to leave home.
The success of video telemental health relies on both patients’ and providers’ acceptance of, and satisfaction with, this modality. Studies of video telemental health treatment for a range of mental health conditions report high rates of patient satisfaction (Fletcher et al., 2018), even among less technologically savvy patients (Campbell, O’Gorman, & Cernovsky, 2015). A recent review of 38 studies on provider attitudes (Connolly, Miller, Lindsay, & Bauer, 2020) found that clinicians thought home telemental health was effective and valued the modality’s ability to improve access to care, save time and money, and increase flexibility. Yet, some clinicians reported extra work preparing for video sessions, problems with poor audio or visual quality, or disconnection during treatment sessions. In studies that assessed clinician attitudes before and after using video telemental health, clinicians’ interest in and comfort with the modality often improved after they tried it and saw that their patients were receptive to it (Connolly et al., 2020).
Telemental Health via Telephone
Whereas most trials of video telemental health have tested it against in-person specialty mental health care, research has often compared telephone psychotherapy with routine care in settings that lack robust mental health services. A large body of literature has established the effectiveness of telephone smoking cessation counseling relative to no or minimal intervention (Matkin, Ordóñez-Mena, & Hartmann-Boyce, 2019), and three studies have shown that motivational interviewing delivered via telephone can reduce drinking or alcohol-related problems (Jiang, Wu, & Gao, 2017). In a recent meta-analysis, telephone psychotherapy for depression was more effective than control conditions and as effective as (not superior to) active comparator conditions (Castro et al., 2020). Another review (Coughtrey & Pistrang, 2018) found that telephone psychotherapy for depression or anxiety outperformed usual care or wait list in four out of five randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and outperformed an active comparator in one RCT. Three noninferiority trials have directly compared telephone and in-person delivery of the same treatment. Telephone psychotherapy was as effective as in-person treatment for obsessive–compulsive disorder in two studies (Lovell et al., 2006; Turner et al., 2014). In a third treatment trial for depression, telephone psychotherapy was noninferior to in-person psychotherapy at the end of treatment, but in-person therapy was superior at 6-month follow-up (Mohr et al., 2012). A recent review suggests that therapeutic alliance and process factors in telephone therapy tend to be similar to in-person psychotherapy (Irvine et al., 2020).
In summary, video- and telephone-based telemental health services are often as effective as in-person modalities for the treatment of several psychological conditions. Both patients and providers report high levels of satisfaction with telemental health modalities, and exposure to telemental health can increase satisfaction over time. Although providers who have never used telemental health may have concerns about offering these services, the COVID-19 pandemic required clinicians to quickly face these fears and shift to a different health care model.
VHA Response to COVID-19: Scaling up Remote Services to Maintain Continuity of Care
VHA is the nation’s largest integrated health care system, annually caring for over 6 million veterans (Harpaz-Rotem & Hoff, 2020) at 1,286 sites (Veterans Health Administration Support Service Center, 2020). Approximately 25% of all veterans live in rural counties that often have few or no mental health providers (Andrilla, Patterson, Garberson, Coulthard, & Larson, 2018; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Rural Health, 2020). Since the 1960s, VHA has been a pioneer in using telemental health to overcome geographic barriers to care, especially for rural veterans and veterans with disabilities or health conditions make travel to clinics difficult (Adams et al., 2019; Darkins, 2014).
During the decade before the current pandemic, video telemental health visits in VHA increased eightfold (see Figure 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. VHA Mental Health Encounters via Clinical Video Teleconferencing, Fiscal Years, 2002 to 2019. VHA = Veterans Health Administration, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs; VVC = VA Video Connect.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
This expansion was facilitated by several factors. VHA developed VA Video Connect (VVC), an encrypted, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant platform that allows veterans to see and talk to their health care team from anywhere within the United States or its territories. VVC can be accessed using the Internet through an appointment link sent to both the clinician’s and veteran’s e-mail. The VHA Tablet to Home Initiative also provided over 38,000 mobile devices (i.e., tablets and iPads with 4G data plans) to veterans who did not have adequate equipment or infrastructure at home to enable telehealth care (Jacobs et al., 2019).
In 2016, VHA established 11 telemental health “hubs” that served nearly 260 predominantly rural and/or underserved “spoke” sites through the end of fiscal year 2019 (FY19). This enabled a cadre of hub clinicians who were experienced and comfortable with telemental health to provide care to underserved areas. The VA MISSION Act, H. R. 5674, 115th Cong. (2018) authorized VA providers using telehealth methods to provide care for any veteran who needed services, irrespective of VA provider or veteran location within the United States. Leveraging these advances, VHA set an ambitious performance target: by the end of FY20, 100% of VHA outpatient mental health and primary care providers would be trained and capable of providing services to patients using video telehealth methods. In FY19, VHA providers delivered 786,000 video telemental health encounters (e.g., psychotherapy, case management, medication management, or check-in appointments) to more than 230,000 veterans, with more than a quarter of those visits delivered directly to the patient’s home or another location of their choice (see Figure 1).
Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, VHA responded by quickly ramping up telemental health services to ensure the provision of mental health services for veterans with as little disruption as possible. The next sections of this article review VHA’s administrative preparations for a shift to virtual care, provider training, clinical actions to maintain continuity of care, and rapid shifts in provision of care during the first weeks of the pandemic.
Administrative Preparations for Expanding Virtual Care
With the onset of the pandemic, telemental health shifted from being a tool preferred by some veterans to a critical means of maintaining continuity of care while limiting in-person visits and reducing risk of contagion (Heyworth, Kirsh, Zulman, Ferguson, & Kizer, 2020). To decrease the need for in-person visits, mental health leaders worked closely with providers and program leads to determine what components of care (e.g., psychotherapy, psychiatric management, and case management) could be delivered virtually, and to determine which essential services (e.g., methadone dosing, transcranial stimulation, and inpatient acute psychiatric care) could only be delivered on-site.
A key concern of VHA during the COVID-19 pandemic was ensuring access to mental health care, especially for patients who were especially vulnerable. Many VHA facilities prepared for a shift to remote care by using the electronic medical record data to update lists of veterans who, based on their clinical status, should be prioritized for outreach and virtual care (e.g., those at high risk for suicide, diagnosed with opiate use disorder, or in special programs such Mental Health Intensive Case Management). Nationally, VHA expanded one of its preexisting dashboards to help identify and enable closer monitoring of veterans at risk of suicide who screen positive for, or have a diagnosis of, COVID-19. These administrative preparations established the infrastructure to ensure continuity of care for the most at-risk patients.
Training Clinicians in New Practices
After the outbreak of COVID-19, VHA accelerated its training efforts to prepare its clinical workforce for the delivery of virtual care via video. VHA had previously developed a comprehensive set of nationally required standardized trainings to help clinicians translate their existing skills for use over a video platform. These trainings focused on video telehealth and addressed documentation, legal and policy considerations, quality and safety procedures, techniques for improving the virtual clinical experience, and technology troubleshooting.
The documentation component of VHA training reviewed recording the patient’s physical address, phone number, consent for virtual care, and a survey of the patient environment for safety and confidentiality during each visit. Legal and policy telehealth training reviewed relevant licensure issues and remote prescribing regulations for controlled substances. Quality and safety training covered preparations at the beginning of each encounter to facilitate an emergency response if a medical or behavioral problem arose. Clinicians used a standard national telehealth emergency template to collect contact information needed to deploy a local emergency response if needed (911, E911). These preparations enabled VHA to scale up virtual care safely during a time of significant stress among patients and providers.
VHA’s telehealth trainings also demonstrated techniques for creating a positive patient-provider therapeutic experience. These include preparing the patient for virtual care and addressing patient concerns, staging (optimal visual and audio set up, attire, and reducing background distractions), and “netiquette” techniques (e.g., establishing eye contact by looking directly into the camera, speaking slowly if there is a brief delay in transmission). Finally, the required VA telehealth training included a review of the video technology platform and tips for troubleshooting technology issues. All clinicians are required to complete these online trainings and carry out at least one virtual visit before providing virtual care on an ongoing basis. Supervisors also have option of having their clinicians do a skills assessment with a video teleconferencing preceptor. The preceptor models the core competencies, has the clinician demonstrate the skills, and provides additional coaching if needed.
In contrast to training requirements for video telemental health, VHA did not have a formal program to train clinicians in delivering care by telephone. Although clinicians follow some of the same safety procedures as for video (e.g., determining the patients’ location), clinicians were assumed to not need formal training to adapt their interactions for telephone.
Actions to Ensure Continuity of Care
As communities received guidance about the need for physical distancing to reduce the spread of the virus, VHA national leadership worked with local facilities to maintain continuity of care. From the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, national VHA mental health leadership used daily and weekly emails and conference calls to support mental health providers throughout the VHA system, provide up-to-date information about evolving conditions, and obtain facility-level feedback. Mental health leaders at the local and national level disseminated materials to support their staff, reiterated available resources to enable virtual care, shared promising practices, encouraged self-care, and set expectations that service delivery might need to be adjusted repeatedly throughout surge and recovery periods of the pandemic. Mental health leadership also encouraged providers to be adaptable to address needs of all veterans in their caseload.
VHA issued national guidance encouraging facilities to contact veterans to offer virtual encounters in place of scheduled appointments, and to reserve in-person visits for urgent care (e.g., psychiatric acuity, suicidality). Patients were informed that their pending mental health appointments would not be canceled, but instead were asked if these appointments could be provided by phone or video whenever possible. VHA providers also prioritized contacting patients who had been designated as especially vulnerable even if they did not have a scheduled appointment. After meeting these first two priorities, providers were encouraged to reach out to the remainder of their patients to ensure that all veterans had support during this stressful period.
VHA’s preferred platform for video delivery is VVC. However, VHA also encouraged the use of telephone as a primary modality to augment VVC use during the first phase of COVID-19.
VHA’s rapid scale-up of telemental health posed technological and regulatory challenges. Clinicians initially provided much of their care by telephone. Phone contact was critical for reaching patients who lacked reliable Internet service or lacked devices to use video telehealth. Although mental health leaders often encouraged clinicians to provide psychotherapy by phone, as needed, during the first few weeks of the pandemic, telephone psychotherapy initially received less reimbursement credit than psychotherapy via video. However, after May 1, 2020 the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services relaxed its guidelines to allow use of regular mental health procedure codes (e.g., psychotherapy codes) for care via telephone during the current public health emergency (Veterans Health Administration Health Informatics Management, 2020).
Even with a great deal of care being delivered by phone, the huge increase in use of VVC during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic strained the bandwidth of the system, and some clinicians were unable to reliably access VVC. Under these extraordinary circumstances, in line with guidance offered by the Department of Health and Human Services (2020), VHA temporarily relaxed some HIPAA compliance requirements and permitted health care providers to communicate with patients via nonpublic facing video chat apps (e.g., Skype, FaceTime) in addition to VVC. VHA clinicians were instructed to enable all encryption and privacy modes when using such apps and to notify patients about all new privacy risks. Although VHA allowed these alternative video platforms to meet immediate demand, VHA also worked to increase its own VVC capacity. Between mid-March and mid-April 2020, VHA more than doubled its number of on-site nodes for VVC, and VHA added additional cloud-based nodes in May, 2020. As VHA’s video capacity expanded, clinicians were asked to decrease their use of telephone or non-VA platforms, and resume use of VVC whenever possible. Although there were significant challenges to the scaling up process, VHA was quick to identify and troubleshoot these challenges to ensure continuity of care and reduce barriers to telehealth services.
Shift to Telemental Health Provision of Care
These planning, training, and infrastructure initiatives prepared VHA to shift to a remote health care model. Before COVID-19, VHA delivered 1.5 million to 1.8 million mental health encounters (including case management, psychotherapy, medication management, check-in appointments, and other services) each month, with 85% of encounters in person, 11% by telephone, and 5% by to-office or to-home video (see Figure 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 2. Modality of VHA Mental Health Encounters, October 2019 to May, 2020. VHA = Veterans Health Administration, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs; VVC = VA Video Connect.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
VHA began to shift to virtual care in mid-March, 2020 when the pandemic was declared, and new directives were issued to reduce in-person contact. Telephone and direct-to-home video contacts more than doubled between February and March, with a corresponding reduction in face-to-face visits (see Figure 2).
In April of 2020, VHA’s mental health services shifted predominantly to virtual care. In-person visits accounted for only 20% of the roughly 1.5 million mental health encounters that month, with the remainder of care provided by telephone (65%), direct to home video (14%), and minimal video to office (1%). The number of telephone contacts in April represented a nearly sixfold expansion over the average encounters in the 5 months before COVID-19 (October 2019 through February 2020), while to home video visits increased eightfold. In May and June, fewer than 20% of mental health encounters were provided in-person. As VHA increased its VVC capacity, the number of VVC visits increased from 219,000 in April to 305,000 in June. The number of VVC visits in June was an 11-fold increase relative to the 5 months before the pandemic. Use of telephone encounters correspondingly declined from 65% of encounters in April to 59% in June. Summing across all modalities, the mean dose of care that veterans received during April to June was 2.36 mental health encounters per month. This was only a slight reduction from the mean of 2.55 encounters per month that veterans received before the pandemic, in October 2019 through February 2020.
Although VHA’s timely shift to virtual care was broadly successful, this transition was not without difficulties. There was variation in how quickly different facilities (VHA administrative units typically including one or more medical centers and their associated outpatient clinics) scaled up virtual care and reduced in-person visits. Some of this divergence may reflect differences in the prevalence of COVID-19, local health departments’ guidance regarding physical distancing, and decisions by leadership of each facility. Facilities also varied in how much virtual care they provided by phone versus video. Across different facilities, the proportion of encounters provided by telephone ranged from 26 to 84% (median = 65%), whereas the proportion of care provided by VVC ranged from 3 to 38% (median = 16%). This variation may partially reflect facilities’ prior preparation and comfort in using video to home as well as veterans’ capability for video connectivity. Facilities’ proportion of VVC encounters during the pandemic was strongly predicted, r = .38, p < .001, by their proportion of VVC encounters in the October 2019 to February 2020 period before the pandemic.
Even with increasing use of VVC, telephone accounted for the majority of care in June 2020. The nine VHA facilities with the highest use of VVC still completed more of their mental health encounters by telephone (44 to 55%) than by video (37 to 43%). Although many phone encounters were likely case management calls or brief check-ins, which are routinely done by phone, psychotherapy was also being provided via telephone during this time.
Before the pandemic, VHA policies and trainings emphasized video as the recommended telemental health modality, In the first weeks of the pandemic, to ensure that all veterans could be contacted promptly, VHA directives supported clinicians using telephone as a primary modality. In May and June 2020, national guidance shifted to encourage use of VVC as the primary platform. Reasons for clinicians’ continued reliance on phone after April may include difficulty reeducating veterans and clinicians who started using phone to now shift to prioritize video; limited administrative support for launching telemental health; difficulties preparing less tech-savvy patients to use VVC; some clinicians having difficulty getting comfortable with video care; and lack of good Internet connection access in some communities.
VHA’s rapid and successful shift to telemental health services involved significant challenges. Quickly overhauling a nationwide health care system with over 1,200 sites required significant preparations across administrative, staff, and facility levels; these initiatives ensured continuity of care for thousands of veterans during a stressful and uncertain period. Even still, VHA continues to face ongoing challenges in the shift to telemental health care, including efforts to prioritize the use of video-based services. Examining VHA’s experience during the COVID-19 pandemic can provide valuable information to other clinical practices and health care organizations that face similar challenges.
Implications for VHA and Other Organizations in Providing Virtual Care in Response to COVID-19

VHA’s pivot to virtual care was enabled by its prior clinical, technical, and organizational investment in telemental health. Yet, even with these resources and experience, VHA had to respond to new challenges that emerged while scaling up its provision of virtual care in response to COVID-19. Other health care organizations are likely to face similar challenges in expanding their use of telemental health during and beyond the current pandemic.
One framework for understanding the issues organizations face in implementing new health technologies is the Nonadoption, Abandonment, Scale-up, Spread, and Sustainability model (NASSS; Greenhalgh et al., 2017). The NASSS framework focuses specifically on adoption of technologies in health care settings and was developed based on a review of 28 prior technology implementation frameworks. The NASSS posits that a health care organization’s ability to integrate a new technological innovation into care depends on seven factors. These factors are: (1) the value of the innovation, (2) the availability and complexity of the technology, (3) the clinical complexity of the condition and population being treated, (4) the degree to which adopters need to develop new skills, (5) the organization’s capacity for change, (6) the regulatory and financial context, and (7) the organization’s ability to adapt and embed the technology into work processes (Greenhalgh et al., 2017). In Table 1,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Challenges to Adoption and Expansion of Telemental Health
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
this framework is used to summarize the challenges VHA encountered in expanding use of telemental health before and after the onset of COVID-19, which other organizations may also encounter in scaling up telemental health. Next we describe lessons learned in each of these domains.
Value of Telemental Health
VHA originally valued telemental health as way to reduce travel and other logistical burdens for patients and expand rural patients’ access to specialty care. Telemental health took on a new importance when COVID-19 forced a sudden shift to virtual care.
Other mental health providers (both individual clinicians and health care organizations) that previously saw telemental health as desirable but not essential may now view telemental health as a critical tool for responding to the current pandemic. Yet, as these providers gain experience using telemental health during the pandemic, they may discover additional benefits that lead them to sustain their use of virtual care after the pandemic. Telemental health may enable providers to better reach underserved parts of their patient population that might not otherwise come in for treatment, sometimes resulting from stigma (e.g., members of minority groups) or difficulty traveling to clinics (lack of transportation, disabilities that limit mobility,). Telemental health may also allow providers to grow their practices and expand their patient bases to a larger geographic area. Providers may find that some patients prefer in-home care because of greater convenience (e.g., childcare, afterhours access), reduced travel burden, or greater perceived privacy (Morland et al., 2019). These additional benefits may encourage mental health providers to keep using telemental health as a core modality of care provision, even after the current public health emergency ends (Rosen, Glassman, & Morland, 2020).
Managing Technological Complexity
VHA’s experience indicates the importance of flexibility in choosing and using telemental health technologies. Based on current scientific evidence and prepandemic reimbursement policies, VHA championed video as the primary modality for virtual mental health care. During the pandemic, VHA scaled up its video visits for mental health more quickly than its use of video in primary care or other medical specialties (Heyworth et al., 2020). Technological advances facilitated that shift. Technology for video conferencing has become more widely available and easier to use. Many veterans conducted their VA video visits using their own smart phone rather than a dedicated tablet provide by VA. When its unprecedented scale-up of video telemental health care stressed the VVC system, VHA was able to make use of other commercially available video platforms to ensure continued coverage.
Yet, despite advances in video teleconferencing, telephone remains our most reliable and widely available telemental health technology. When VHA had to rapidly shift to delivering 80% of its care virtually, most of that virtual care needed to be delivered by telephone. This modality required no training or preparations for patients and could reach areas with poor Internet access. This suggests that health care organizations may need to use a mix of platforms to deliver virtual care. Mental health providers will have to decide which functions can be done well via telephone and which should ideally be done via video (with telephone backup if video equipment fails).
Managing Clinical Complexity
One of the key barriers to adoption of telemental health is providers’ concern that a patient will become dysregulated during the session, and that this situation could be dangerous without a clinician physically present (Gershkovich et al., 2016; Gilmore & Ward-Ciesielski, 2019). As discussed previously, advance planning (e.g., having backup phone numbers, identifying an emergency contact, and knowing what local emergency services are available) can help ensure that the clinician is capable of responding to a crisis immediately, even when meeting with a client remotely. VHA had the benefit of established protocols for managing suicidality and for remotely triaging patients before the COVID-19 pandemic. Other organizations can use guidelines from the American Psychiatric Association and American Telemedicine Association (2018) to establish their own protocols for managing risk and determine when patients can be managed virtually or when they require in-person crisis care.
One area of clinical complexity that has not been adequately researched is delivery of virtual care to people with disabilities. Telehealth can improve access to care for people whose physical disabilities limit their mobility and make traveling to clinics difficult. Yet, clinicians and researchers need to consider how to best adapt video and telephone care for people with auditory or visual impairments (Connolly et al., 2020). Section 508 regulations (United States Access Board, 2017) provide guidance on how to make government websites accessible to people with sensory and cognitive disabilities; similar guidance is needed on how to adapt telephone or video care for people living with sensory or cognitive disabilities.
Adopter Preparation and Training
VHA provided training to help clinicians feel more comfortable with virtual care. A variety of training materials are publicly available to help clinicians in other settings develop their telehealth knowledge and skills (American Psychiatric Association, n.d.; American Psychological Association, n.d.). VHA’s experience suggests that clinicians who are early adopters of telemental health can provide coaching and support to colleagues who are less experienced in virtual care. It may be useful to train clinicians in mixed approaches (e.g., when to use video and when to use phone). Checklists can be used to orient clinicians to safety procedures (e.g., confirming patients’ location) and communication tips when providing care by phone; these could be adopted from existing materials for video telemental health.
Less attention has been given to how to support patients in the transition to video telemental health. VHA encountered difficulty in helping veterans who were less experienced with technology or who had cognitive impairments utilize clinical video teleconferencing. More work is needed to develop tools that guide clinicians through the process of teaching patients and family members how to use video teleconferencing. Another option is developing implementation models that augment clinician contact with direct-to-patient support from technical assistance personnel to prepare clients for virtual care.
Organizational Factors
VHA’s size and structure both facilitated and hindered the shift to virtual care. The shift to telemental health was facilitated by VHA’s decades of telehealth experience, electronic medical record, and sufficient resources to develop its own video platform and provide tablets to veterans. However, it is also challenging to make rapid changes in a decentralized organization in which over 350,000 employees provide care to over 6 million patients a year (Harpaz-Rotem & Hoff, 2020). Substituting telephone care for in-person appointments in late March, 2020, and then shifting again to increase use of video in April through June, required coordinated efforts from many people. This involved not only patients and their providers, but also supervisors, higher level managers, scheduling clerks, IT staff, and (if providers were shifting to telework from home) human resources. This rapid shift was often challenging and proceeded successfully only because people put in extra effort to troubleshoot organizational challenges. VHA is now initiating a needs assessment to identify barriers and facilitators of telehealth implementation at different sites. This will inform efforts to further expand telemental health, especially video care, systemwide.
Regulatory and Financial Context
VHA’s scale-up of virtual care was facilitated by MISSION Act legislation allowing care from VHA clinicians across state lines and by HHS allowing temporary use of non-HIPAA-compliant platforms (Kannarkat, Smith, & McLeod-Bryant, 2020). Other regulatory changes in response to COVID-19 may help other organizations expand their delivery of virtual mental health care. HHS regulations now allow reimbursement of virtual care even if is not follow-up to an office visit (Kannarkat et al., 2020). CMS is allowing use of regular mental health procedure codes for care via telephone (Veterans Health Administration Health Informatics Management, 2020). Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) made an exception to the Ryan Haight Act, which required an in-person visit before prescribing a controlled substance (allowing a telehealth assessment). Furthermore, the DEA and Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA) now allow providers to prescribe buprenorphine after a telephone assessment (Bojdani et al., 2020). Regulations may further evolve over time, and it remains to be seen whether these temporary actions during the current public health emergency will lead to long-term regulatory changes that allow expansion of, and better reimbursement for, remote care.
Adaptation and Embedding Technology Into Care
For technological innovations in health care to be sustained, an organization must adapt and refine its processes, eventually embedding the new technology into the fabric of care (Greenhalgh et al., 2017). The COVID-19 pandemic rapidly accelerated VHA initiatives that were already underway to train all mental health and primary care providers in virtual care. In the early stages of this pandemic, VHA demonstrated great organizational flexibility, maintaining continual two-way communication with mental health leaders and providers during a time of dynamic change, and empowering clinicians to use alternative approaches necessary to ensure that veterans continued to get the right care at the right time. The findings here reflect VHA’s use of telemental health in the early phase of response; VHA’s activities are now settling into a stabilization phase in which new policies and procedures are becoming more established. However, care practices may need to continue evolving as the pandemic subsides and resurfaces.
Other organizations will face parallel challenges in making a shift to virtual care. After the initial phase of adoption, they will need to refine their strategy to better integrate telemental health into their ongoing processes of care. The shift to virtual care in response to COVID-19 is still in its early phase. It is yet to be seen how clinicians and health care organizations will evolve in their use of telemental health over the course of the pandemic and after it passes.
Conclusion: The Future of Telemental Health in the Wake of COVID19

The current pandemic has forced many mental health care providers and their clients to rapidly shift to virtual care. This has created a crisis, but also opportunity and perhaps a silver lining. One-to-one in-office care is not sufficient to meet the mental health needs of the population; multiple delivery methods are needed (Gruber et al., 2020). The long-term effects of this pandemic on the delivery of virtual care remain unclear, but it seems unlikely that care will revert back to prepandemic norms. Hopefully, the expansion of virtual care during this pandemic will enable VHA and other health care organizations to become more flexible in how they deliver treatment, allowing patients to choose from more options for receiving care in whatever way they determine to be most convenient, appropriate and clinically effective.
This evaluation of VHA’s shift to virtual care had several limitations. Data on changes in VHA’s video infrastructure (numbers of additional VVC nodes installed) did not readily translate into estimates of how many additional encounters these nodes could support. There were no reliable data on the types of mental health services provided via telephone. Although billing regulations were updated in May to allow coding of specific procedures via telephone, clinicians were still learning to make these coding changes. There was also little information on site-level barriers and facilitators that might explain varying rates of VVC use at different VHA facilities.
Even so, VHA’s experience suggests three factors may be especially important in determining the degree to which VHA and other health care systems more fully integrate telemental health into routine clinical care, even after the COVID-19 pandemic has abated. The first factor is whether the temporary regulatory and billing changes enacted on an emergency basis will lead to longer-term revisions of HIPAA regulations, DEA requirements, and billing codes to facilitate and appropriately reimburse use of telemental health care (Shachar, Engel, & Elwyn, 2020). Without changes in financial and regulatory domains, providers may be unlikely to sustain greater use of virtual care.
The second factor is obtaining better empirical data on the relative strengths of video, telephone, and other virtual modalities (e.g., text messaging, apps) in performing different functions in the provision of care. Telephone delivery is a standard for case management, smoking cessation counseling, and crisis hotlines. Video is currently the telehealth standard of care for many other functions, such as psychiatric management and trauma-focused psychotherapy for PTSD. We need more research to help us determine which clinical functions can be delivered effectively by telephone, which are best done via video, and which functions can be done via text messaging or mobile apps. More noninferiority studies are needed comparing telephone and in-person psychotherapy. Comparative effectiveness studies are needed to assess the relative outcomes of telephone and video modalities. The only studies directly comparing video and telephone counseling are for smoking cessation; this work found video was no better than telephone (Tzelepis et al., 2019). More research is also needed on models of care that combine different modalities, such as initially providing online or smartphone self-management tools with telephone support and then stepping up to remote psychotherapy if needed (Mohr et al., 2019).
The final factor that will impact the integration of telemental health into routine clinical care is better understanding of patient preferences. Much of the research on patient satisfaction in video or telephone care is based on patients who opted into telemedicine trials. Because of the pandemic, a large and diverse patient population, including many who might not have initially chosen telehealth, now have experience with virtual care. Some of these patients may find they like receiving care at home; others may be eager to resume in-person treatment as soon as they can. Feedback from these informed consumers can help health care organizations develop more flexible, patient-centered approaches for collaboratively deciding when to provide care in-person, via video, by telephone, or through a combination of formats.
The COVID-19 pandemic has forced health care organizations, clinicians, and consumers to rapidly shift to increasing their use of telemental health. Lessons learned from this pandemic can help VHA and other health care organizations expand their ability to offer virtual care as part of their portfolio of services. This will move us closer to the goal of providing effective mental health care to those who need it in whatever setting and format that they prefer.",
"29": "Behavioral health (BH) problems among children and adolescents are common, with at least one in five suffering from a disorder and others at risk (Patel, Flisher, Hetrick, & McGorry, 2007). Many e-BH care options like websites, chat groups, apps, texts, and wearable sensors are being used with in-person and video telebehavioral health (TBH; Hilty, Chan, Torous, Mahautmr, & Mucic, 2015; Hilty, Rabinowitz, et al., 2018; Odgers & Jensen, 2020; Russell & Gajos, 2020; Sequeira et al., 2020; Odgers & Jensen, 2020). Treatments that rely less on specialized human resources like mobile health, if feasible and effective, could create scalable approaches at a population level (World Health Organization, 2017), particularly in collaboration with pediatricians/primary care providers (PCPs).
Video adult studies and guidelines (American Telemedicine Association [ATA], 2009, 2013; Hilty, Ferrer, et al., 2013; Hubley, Lynch, Schneck, Thomas, & Shore, 2016) preceded child and adolescent developments related to assessment, management, collaborative care and guidelines (ATA, 2017; Coffey, Vanderlip, & Sarvet, 2017; Myers, Vander Stoep, Zhou, McCarty, & Katon, 2015; Nelson & Patton, 2016; Nelson & Sharp, 2016). Mobile health, social media, and wearable sensors are effectively used to assess and treat patients of all ages (Aboujaoude & Salame, 2016; Archangeli, Marti, Wobga-Pasiah, & Zima, 2017; Fedele, Cushing, Fritz, Amaro, & Ortega, 2017; Russell & Gajos, 2020; Sequeira et al., 2020). Child and adolescent patients, parents, and families have played an instrumental role in many ways: development and pretesting technology (Hetrick et al., 2018; Whittaker et al., 2008); ensuring wearable sensors really work day-to-day (e.g., water or contact sports); and providing feedback to for visuals, chat options, and communication methods with clinicians (Anderson et al., 2018; Thompson, Goodwin, Ojeda, Morris, & Fairman, 2020; Russell & Gajos, 2020).
Competencies in information technology were suggested as part of health care reform in 2003 (National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2020). Most of the competency work has been done for video in adults, though it may apply to children and adolescents (Hilty et al., 2015; Hilty, Maheu, et al., 2018; Maheu et al., 2020). Social media (Hilty, Zalpuri, et al., 2018), mobile health (Hilty, Chan, Torous, Luo, & Boland, 2020), wearable sensors (Hilty, Armstrong, Luxton, Gentry, & Krupinski, 2020), and asynchronous (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020) competencies have also been done for adults, though they may apply more to children and adolescents. There are no specific telecompetencies for children, adolescents and families, but there are good telepsychiatry toolkits (American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry [AACAP] Committee on, Telepsychiatry and AACAP Committee on Quality Issues, 2017; American Psychiatric Association-AACAP, 2020).
The overarching goal is to use identify clinician behaviors (i.e., skills or competencies) to ensure quality of care for child and adolescent patients and further training. We report general findings applicable to all ages, as some findings overlap for children, adolescents, young adults, and adults, but point out meaningful distinctions between the groups.
Method

Approach
The literature key word search was conducted from January 2000 to March 2020. The philosophical approach to the search was done according to the original six-stage process (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005) and updated modifications (Levac, Colquhoun, & O’Brien, 2010) for scoping reviews.
The Research Question
The question that guided the review was, “What skills are needed for clinicians and trainees to provide quality care using asynchronous technologies for children and adolescents, and how can they be made measurable to implement, teach and evaluate?” Within that question, there are other questions including (a) What steps have researchers, organizations and others taken to establish technological competencies, specifically, asynchronous competencies? (b) How can asynchronous competencies be organized in a competency-based education framework, in terms of components, concepts, and processes? (c) What administrative approaches can facilitate asynchronous clinical care, education/training, and evaluation in order for positive implementation and sustainability?
Identifying Relevant Studies: The Search Strategy
A literature key word search from January 2000 to March, 2020 used the following databases: Pubmed/Medline, APA PsycNET, PsycINFO, Embase, Web of Science, Scopus, and Social Sciences Citation Index. The initial literature search targeted four concept areas related to the behavioral health care of children and adolescents: (a) competencies (behavior, cognition, cognitive, curriculum, education, framework, learner, pedagogy, skill, training, Milestones); (b) asynchronous technologies (app, device, eConsult, e-consult, e-mail, mobile, monitoring, sensor, social media, store-and-forward, text, wearable); (c) synchronous telepsychiatry, telebehavioral or telemental health (video, web-based, Internet; since asynchronous technologies often added); and (d) clinical therapeutic relationship (behavior, boundaries, care, communication, connect, engagement, empathy, family, intimacy, outcome, parent, play, psychotherapy, system, therapeutic, therapy, training, trust, youth). Studies that focused predominantly on interventions for parents, substance use, well-being/prevention, and pregnant/parenting themes were not included.
Study Selection
An iterative process was used to search the literature, refine the search strategy, and review articles for study inclusion. Two authors (DH, JT) independently, in parallel, screened the potentially relevant studies based on titles and abstracts. Full-text articles were reviewed using inclusion criteria: key words used from concept area 1 (competencies) and 2 (asynchronous telehealth) used in combination with 3 (telehealth mode) or 4 (clinical). Exclusion criteria are shown in Figure 1.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Search flow chart: Diagram of studies and other papers reviewed.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
When disagreements on study inclusion occurred, a third reviewer (IZ) determined the outcome.
Charting the Data
A data-charting form was not developed and used, but notes were organized and a descriptive/narrative analytical method was used to summarize the process and content information from the articles and discussions with experts, in an effort to chart and summarize complex concepts.
Analysis, Reporting, and Considering the Meaning of the Findings
Because there were so few articles, findings were reported individually and excerpts from published framework tables—mostly for adult care—were organized into a table and contextualized inclusively for adolescent, children and families, if applicable. The Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) Milestone framework was selected, as it is well known across medicine and by some BH professions (ACGME, 2013).
Consultation for Expert Opinion
Expert option was solicited to review preliminary findings and suggest changes by (a) a series of medical educator conference calls focused on competencies, based on previous work (Hilty, Crawford, et al., 2015; Zalpuri et al., 2018); (b) regular conference calls with clinicians and researchers of international organizations (e.g., ATA, American Psychiatric Association, Coalition for Technology in Behavioral Science [CTiBS]); (c) outreach to representatives of BH professions, based on past consensus processes (Maheu, Drude, Hertlein, & Hilty, 2018); and (d) discussions with individuals referred by the conference calls. Participants included chairs, deans, course/program directors, national society executive directors, officers, and journal editors.
Results

Literature
Figure 1 shows that from a total of 5,877 potential references, two authors (DH, JT) found 5,567 eligible for title and abstract review and found 519 articles eligible for full text review as directly relevant to the concept areas in combination. Of the eligible studies, 409 were excluded, leaving a total of 110 articles.
Overview of Synchronous and Asynchronous Technologies and Workflow
Clinical care in-person, by video, telephone and via asynchronous technologies have similarities and differences (Hilty, Parish et al., 2020; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020; Hilty, Maheu, Drude, & Hertlein, 2018; Lyneham & Rapee, 2005; Yellowlees et al., 2018). Technology may change the nature of interaction for participants in terms of exchange of information, clarity, responsiveness and comfort, depending on their digital literacy (e.g., digital natives and immigrants; ATA, 2017; American Psychiatric Association and American Telemedicine Association, 2018; Hilty et al., 2013; Myers & Turvey, 2013; Maheu et al., 2018; Wang, Myers, & Sundaram, 2013). Technology integration into workflow (e.g., clinic, communication, policy, procedures) takes effort to ensure quality and medico-legal issues are addressed (see Table 1;
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. A Comparison of Synchronous and Asynchronous Care Dimensions: Clinical, Technical, and Administrative Workflow
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020). Financial, policy, and other mandates have yet to be sorted (e.g., managing emergencies; Edwards-Stewart, Alexander, Armstrong, Hoyt, & O’Donohue, 2019; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020).
Behavioral Health Profession and International Telemedicine and Country Competencies, Position Statements, and Guidelines on Asynchronous Technologies
A comparison of BH professions’ best practices, guidelines, and position statements for clinicians to adjust to video and asynchronous technologies shows more work on adult rather than child and adolescent care (see Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. A Comparison of Behavioral Professional Guidelines and Position Statements Related to Asynchronous Technologies
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Contributions come from: psychiatry/medicine (American Psychiatric Association, 2014, 2017; American Psychiatric Association-ATA, 2018); psychology (Australian Psychological Society, 2011; American Psychological Association [APA], 2013; 2019; Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards, 2014; British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy, 2019; Canadian Psychological Association, 2006; Goss, Anthony, Jamieson, & Palmer, 2001); social work (National Association of Social Workers [NASW], 2005; NASW, Association of Social Work Boards, Council on Social Work Education, and Clinical Social Work Association, 2017); counseling (American Counseling Association, 2014; Canadian Counselling and Psychotherapy Association Technology and Innovative Solutions, 2019); couple/marriage/family (American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy [AAMFT], 2015a, 2015b; Association of Marriage and Family Therapy Regulatory Boards, 2016); the ATA; and the American Psychiatric Association-ATA Guideline (2018). Most guidelines focus on video and sparingly mention e-mail, e-consultation, social media or texting (ATA, 2009, 2013; American Psychiatric Association and American Telemedicine Association, 2018; Hilty, Crawford, et al., 2015; Hilty, Maheu, et al., 2018; Maheu et al., 2018, 2020).
The U.S. AACAP (2017), the ATA Child and Adolescent Telemental Health Guideline (2017) and AACAP-American Psychiatric Association (2019) specifically focus on child and adolescent video; the ATA Guideline more purposely discussed apps, asynchronous, e-mail, e-consultation, monitoring, social media, text, and wearables (ATA, 2017). A more substantial discussion of asynchronous technology began in the U.S. with competencies published for social media (Hilty, Zalpuri, et al., 2018; Zalpuri et al., 2018), mobile health (Hilty, Chan, Torous, Luo, & Boland, 2019a; 2019b, 2020), and asynchronous care (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020).
Specific Asynchronous Technology Modes
E-mail, text, and apps
e-Mail interviewing with young populations is cost-effective, offers flexibility, provides a transcript for analysis, and offers time to reflect on questions, compose answers, and respond at leisure from home surroundings (Cleary & Walter, 2011). Text-based mobile health interventions are used for reminders, information, supportive messages, and self-monitoring (Berrouiguet, Baca-García, Brandt, Walter, & Courtet, 2016; Senanayake et al., 2019). Keyboard characters and emoticons may enrich communication and comprehension (Aldunate & González-Ibáñez, 2017), though they are not always used in a standard way, particularly across cultures (Hilty, Randhawa, et al., 2020). Apps are used for health, well-being, and clinical topics like homelessness, suicide, substance use (Bry, Chou, Miguel, & Comer, 2018; Glover et al., 2019; Perry, Werner-Seidler, Calear, & Christensen, 2016; Pisani et al., 2018; Stoll, Pina, Gary, & Amresh, 2017; Senanayake et al., 2019; Wyman et al., 2010). Youth and their parents/guardians often need guidance how to check the quality of apps (i.e., evidence-based; Grist, Porter, & Stallard, 2017). Challenges of these technologies include verification of self-report, potentially compromised rapport, technical glitches, biased samples, quality control, confidentiality, and security (Hilty, Randhawa, et al., 2020).
Sensors and wearables
Studies of biobehavioral sensing, machine learning, and wearable technologies in the form of patches or bandages, wristbands, rings, shirts, smartwatches, and smart glasses show largely positive outcomes (Mackintosh et al., 2019; Sequeira et al., 2020), including for cognitive–behavioral therapy to treat depression and anxiety, socialization for autism, and aggression with autism (Goodwin, Mazefsky, Ioannidis, Erdogmus, & Siegel, 2019; Hollis, Falconer, Martin, Whittington, Stockton, Glazebrook, & Davies, 2017; Voss et al., 2019). Wearable sensors facilitate ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and EM intervention (EMI; Hollis et al., 2017; Russell & Gajos, 2020). Competencies for wearable sensors have been suggested to assess patient needs, facilitate interactivity (e.g., chat, feedback), and use decision support within the EHR (Hilty, Armstrong, et al., 2020).
e-consultation
e-Consultation (i.e., e-consult or eConsult) generally involves a pediatrician/PCP referral for a consultation related to questions outside of their expertise (Hilty, Ingraham, Yang, & Anders, 2004; Hilty et al., 2013; Liddy, Drosinis, & Keely, 2016; Sarvet et al., 2010; Yellowlees, Hilty, Marks, Neufeld, & Bourgeois, 2008). Results also showed consultants have a short response time than for in-person or video options (i.e., a few days rather than weeks or months), high satisfaction by users with ease of completion, and a reduced need for in-person and video visits.
Store-and-forward/asynchronous technology
Store-and-forward technologies have the specialist interpret an image, video (e.g., asynchronous telepsychiatry) or other data, while incorporating clinical history, to give the pediatrician/PCP a plan to implement (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020; Yellowlees et al., 2018). This could also be employed for collaborative, stepped, and integrated care e.g., train a pediatrician/PCP or other team member to do the semistructured interview (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020).
Opportunities and Challenges With Asynchronous Technologies
Shifts in moving from in-person and synchronous care to asynchronous care
Several paradigm shifts are happening with technology-based care. One shift is integrating technology into traditional health care or adapting that care to technology. Social media is integral to adolescents and young adults and therefore part of care (Hilty, Zalpuri, et al., 2018; Zalpuri et al., 2018), so the clinician needs to systematically screen technology use and for what purpose(s; e.g., entertainment, health care, BH), as well as exposure to risks (e.g., self-disclosure, cyberbullying, privacy; Hilty et al., 2019b; Joshi, Stubbe, Li, & Hilty, 2019; Krishna, 2017; Parish & Yellowlees, 2014).
Another shift is that technology outside the office creates a new, previously impossible, sense of continuity, connection, and ease of communication—and this affect the therapeutic frame, expectations, boundaries, and trust (Hilty, Randhawa, et al., 2020). Text-based communication has a sense of immediacy and interaction that builds “trust,” while transcending time and space, but there may be negative consequences (Hilty, Randhawa, et al., 2020). Online communication may improve patient satisfaction (e.g., better access), and online (only) therapeutic modalities have reasonable engagement (Krishna, 2017).
A third shift is how to integrate mobile health, text, sensors, social media, and other technologies into clinical workflow—into the treatment plan and in conjunction with in-person care. In-time data collection can be used to alert a patient or clinician to take action, based on more valid, reliable and meaningful data (Chan, Li, Torous, Gratzer, & Yellowlees, 2018; Grist, Cliffe, Denne, Croker, & Stallard, 2018; Kenny, Dooley, & Fitzgerald, 2016). Care is need to ensure therapeutic rapport, avoid miscommunications and misunderstandings, and prevent problems with privacy and boundaries (e.g., no after-hours texting, not using mobile phone for professional care).
Health System and Institutional Approaches to Technology Competencies
Overview
Competency-based education focuses on clinical skill development in addition to knowledge acquisition (Iobst et al., 2010; Northey & Gehart, 2019). Clinical informatics Milestones were suggested for the EHR, data use (e.g., safety, quality, privacy), and clinical decision support (Hersh et al., 2014). These were followed by adult competency sets for telepsychiatry (Hilty, Crawford, et al., 2015; Hilty, Maheu, et al., 2018), TBH (Maheu et al., 2018, 2020), social media (2018; Hilty, Zalpuri, et al., 2018; Zalpuri et al., 2018), mobile health (Hilty et al., 2019a; 2019b, 2020), wearable sensors (Hilty, Armstrong, et al., 2020), and asynchronous care (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020). Most of these sets used the ACGME domains (ACGME, 2013) and included suggestions for training, faculty development, and institutional change.
Synchronous video is gradually being integrated into clinical care and curricula through seminar, supervision, and rotations in the BH professions (Hilty, Unützer, et al., 2019). A delicate component of this is psychotherapy as part of clinical care and training (i.e., online, e- or otherwise framed; Caldwell, Bischoff, Derrig-Palumbo, & Liebert, 2017; Nelson & Patton, 2016; Pickens, Morris, & Johnson, 2019). Mobile health, social media, and informatics practice require more substantial planning due to clinical decision support, technology selection, and workflow, particularly for families (Wrape & McGinn, 2019; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020). Clinicians need to plan to review data or be prompted, and then adjust treatment plans “in time” rather than waiting until the next in-person or video visit.
The new asynchronous competencies for behavioral health for training
This review uses the six ACGME domains (ACGME, 2013), which are Patient Care, Medical Knowledge, System-Based Practice, Professionalism, Practice-Based Learning and Improvement, and Interpersonal and Communication Skills. The authors used subdomain headings applicable across BH professions (Hilty, Maheu, et al., 2018; Maheu et al., 2020), and shifted content to a 3-level learner system (i.e., Beginner, Competent/Proficient and Expert; Hilty, Crawford, et al., 2015) from a variety of levels reported in the literature (ACGME, 2013; Dreyfus & Dreyfus, 1980).
The competencies for asynchronous technology (see Table 3),
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Abbreviated Adult, Child, and Adolescent Asynchronous Technology Competencies Based on an Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Framework (Organized into Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education Domains and Subdomains)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
teaching and assessment methods (see Table 4),
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Teaching, Assessment, and Evaluation Methods for Asynchronous Competencies
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
and descriptive clinical application examples (see Table 5)
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 5. Clinical and Training Examples of the Asynchronous Competencies (Format: Domain and Subdomain of Clinical Care [Table 3], and Domain and Subdomain of Training [Table 4] If Applicable)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
are suggested for programs to address the specific asynchronous competencies. Training subdomains are: Didactic Teaching; Case-based Learning; Clinical Care with Patients; Professionalism, Supervision, and Practice-based Improvement and Learning; Systems-based Practice, Quality Improvement (QI), Evaluation and Research; and Role as an Educator. Systematic curricular planning and evaluation can link patient, learner, and teaching outcomes (i.e., skill, attitude and/or knowledge; Pratt & Collins, 1998; Kern, Thomas, & Hughes, 2009; Kirkpatrick & Kirkpatrick, 2009).
Institutional competencies
Competencies are suggested to integrate video and other technologies: 1) assess readiness; 2) create/hardwire the culture; 3) write policies and procedures; 4) establish the curriculum and competencies; 5) train learners and faculty; and 6) evaluate/manage change (Hilty, Unützer, et al., 2019). For integrating asynchronous technologies, focus areas are: Patient-Centered Care; Evaluation and Outcomes; Roles/Needs of Participants (e.g., Trainees, Faculty, Teams, Professions); Teams, Professions, and Systems Within Institutions; and the Academic Health Center Institutional Structure, Process, and Administration (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020).
Discussion

When used to their best capacity, asynchronous technologies improve access, reduce costs, facilitate teamwork, and include family and caregivers via new workflows (Fedele et al., 2017; Hilty, Sunderji, Suo, Chan, & McCarron, 2018; Hilty, Unützer, et al., 2019; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020; Raney, Bergman, Torous, & Hasselberg, 2017). This supports patient-centered care, participatory medicine, and quality care (Epstein & Hundert, 2002; Frydman, 2009). Clinician competencies and child and adolescent codesign of technologies could improve real-world practice and maximize uptake (Hetrick et al., 2018; Hilty, Chan, et al., 2020; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020).
Technology literacy needs to be validly, reliably, systematically assessed as part of the context of the family’s overall health (Sefton-Green, Marsh, Erstad, & Flewitt, 2016; Terras & Ramsay, 2016). Research is also needed about the psychology of participants’ emergent behaviors and the influential role of context on use. Clinicians and family have significant professional, social, ethical, and legal responsibilities to ensure children and adolescents use technologies safely in this era of digital marketing (e.g., Google Play Store, Apple Store; Wang et al., 2014; Archangeli et al., 2017; Bry et al., 2018; Extremera, Quintana-Orts, Sánchez-Álvarez, & Rey, 2019; Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020; Torous & Roberts, 2017). Faculty supervisors and leaders also have to ensure the delivery of compassionate care with technology (Hilty, Randhawa, et al., 2020; Kemp et al., 2020).
Academic organizations face many opportunities and challenges related to clinical care, training, research, and administration (Bowe, Lahey, Kegan, & Armstrong, 2003; Hilty, Liu, Stubbe, & Teshima, 2019). An information technology-business-medicine understanding or framework has been proposed to organize/integrate rather than append information technology to existing systems (Hilty, Uno, Chan, Torous, & Boland, 2019; Hilty, Unützer, et al., 2019; Ray, Muhanna, & Barney, 2007). Institutional competencies and new partnerships with informatics could consolidate missions around competencies (Hilty, Torous, et al., 2020). Organizations may have to emphasize effectiveness, implementation, mixed methods research as much or more than randomized controlled trials (Archangeli et al., 2017; Hilty et al., 2013; Marcolino, Alkmim, Pessoa, Maia, & Cardoso, 2019; Proctor et al., 2011). Mobile health and wearable sensors can help with EMA and EMI in daily life (Odgers & Jensen, 2020; Russell & Gajos, 2020).
There are limitations to this article. First, the scoping review process was limited in terms of explicit processes for replicability (e.g., data-charting form to extract data, systematic steps for the analysis phase) and quality of analysis (thematic and numerical; Levac et al., 2010). It could have benefitted from a broader interprofessional team and input across child and adolescent BH organizations. Second, each of the technologies is unique, so greater depth of analysis is needed to determine the “what, when, why and how” they work. Third, institutions differ, and one approach may not fit all. Fourth, this set of competencies must be more clearly defined (i.e., measurable) to implement and evaluate across professions—in conjunction with faculty development and building of a positive e-culture for participants to succeed.
Conclusions
As asynchronous technologies like text, apps, sensors, e-mail, e-consultation, and store-and-forward telehealth are integrated into health care, steps are needed to ensure quality care, clinicians’ skills, and outcomes in line with in-person and synchronous telepsychiatric care. Clinician skillsets (i.e., competencies) for in-person, synchronous and asynchronous technologies overlap, but since the latter has many different components, training could be useful to build a positive e-culture for clinicians, trainees and leaders. Effectiveness and implementation science research—with patient input—is needed to increase the evidence base and usability of mobile health options.",
"30": "SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes corona virus disease 2019 [COVID-19]) has profoundly impacted individuals worldwide. For many, fear of leaving home or concern that the next person with whom they come in contact may cause them harm is unparalleled (Brody, 2020). However, for many of our nation’s veterans—particularly those with posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)—that concern is all too familiar. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve, many Veterans Healthcare Administration (VHA) mental health providers are concerned with (1) if they can and (2) whether they should continue to deliver trauma-focused care during this current crisis.
Because of the VHA’s capacity to offer telemental health services (Myers, Birks, Grubaugh, & Axon, 2020), veterans have the opportunity to continue engaging in trauma-focused treatments remotely using Veterans Affairs (VA) Video Connect, the VHA’s secure video telehealth platform, which allows providers to treat veterans on their mobile devices or personal computers. In addition, the VA has developed a number of free mobile apps to accompany evidence-based treatments (e.g., PE coach 2, CPT coach, PTSD coach, CBT-I coach), allowing veterans to engage in assessment and therapy assignments remotely.
At the Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 58% of veterans with PTSD were already engaging in trauma-focused care via the VA Video Connect prior to COVID-19. For these veterans, the logistical barriers to engaging in care using this format are mostly due to COVID-19–related practical concerns (e.g., no privacy for appointments, no childcare). For other veterans who engaged in therapy in person prior to COVID-19, some have expressed a desire to pause care until they can resume in-person services. Others, however, have been able to transition to telehealth services and want to continue with trauma-focused care. For veterans who have access to trauma-focused treatment and want to either initiate or continue therapy during the pandemic, it begs the question: What are potential hypotheses for why some veterans with PTSD appear to be less impacted by the chaos caused by COVID-19, and should we continue to treat their PTSD symptoms as normal? In an informal survey of providers in a VHA outpatient PTSD clinic, approximately 76% of veterans engaged in PTSD treatment chose to continue despite the COVID-19 pandemic via telehealth. Anecdotally, some of these veterans have described being in combat mode, having already taken steps to prepare for potential shortages of basic necessities including food and supplies well in advance of the implementation of stay-at-home orders. Others have seemed unphased, and perhaps even vindicated, as they have been practicing social distancing (i.e., avoidance) for years.
Among trauma-exposed individuals who later develop PTSD, the fight-or-flight reaction—a response activated when an individual is confronted with a threat or danger—becomes dysregulated, contributing to hyperarousal and problems with inhibitory control when confronted with perceived threatening stimuli (Liberzon & Sripada, 2007). Consequently, emotional (e.g., fear), behavioral (e.g., checking), and physical (e.g., numbness) responses to a perceived threat that at one point were adaptive now result in difficulty identifying when a threat has passed. As a result, for veterans with PTSD, strategies that were previously impairing—such as avoidance of crowded places, being distrustful of others, and increased levels of vigilance—are, in fact, adaptive and useful during this current pandemic. One proposed mechanism thought to underlie the success of exposure-based therapies for PTSD is expectancy violation. Individuals with PTSD expect to have negative experiences when engaging with feared stimuli; however, through successful exposure to feared stimuli without negative consequences, the violation of negative expectancy results in reduction of anxiety over time. During the current pandemic, conversely, instead of expectancy violations occurring through exposure, expectancies are actually confirmed, and some anxiety is alleviated because individuals with PTSD are both validated for their previous symptoms as well as reinforced to continue avoidance behaviors, consistent with the mandates to socially distance. This alignment of internal anxious state and external chaotic environment may be resulting in the temporary relief of anxiety for some veterans with PTSD.
It is unlikely that the temporary relief from some avoidance or hyperarousal symptoms, however, has made much impact on the reexperiencing and negative alterations in mood and cognition symptoms of PTSD. As such, and consistent with the VHA’s National Center for PTSD (2020) recommendations, many providers are continuing to provide PTSD treatment, with some modifications as necessary. For example, through utilization of telehealth, veterans engaging in prolonged exposure (Foa, Hembree, & Rothbaum, 2007) are able to engage in imaginal exposure exercises. In vivo exposure exercises require a great deal of creativity on the provider’s part because of social distancing and stay-at-home orders; however, use of video clips and sensory-focused exposures (e.g., smells reminiscent of the traumatic event) as well as exposures related to checking and safety behaviors at home are all feasible. In addition, with cognitive processing therapy (Resick, Monson, & Chard, 2016), veterans’ responses to the COVID-19 pandemic may serve as valuable evidence for/against trauma-related stuck points, particularly those related to safety and self-efficacy. Other trauma-focused treatments, (e.g., eye movement desensitization and reprocessing, written exposure therapy) have less research examining the effectiveness of delivery using telemental health and may require their own unique adaptations.
It remains to be seen how some of the hallmark avoidance symptoms of PTSD will be impacted after the pandemic is over and social distancing restrictions have been lifted, but it is highly possible that PTSD treatment will become more challenging during that period. Despite that possibility, it does appear that if veterans with PTSD are capable and interested in engaging in trauma-focused care during the pandemic, providers should offer, and deliver, these important treatments.",
"31": "Internet-based interventions are rapidly increasing in number and widely differ in quality, from simple applications giving tips for mood improvement, to real-time texting with a counselor or a chatbot, and even sophisticated programs combining online modules with videoconferencing. There is a growing demand for mental health services in the Western countries. Using the Internet to dispense at least part of these services has many benefits: It provides access to care for those living in rural areas or areas with less practitioners, saves travel and other costs, such as taking time off work and childcare, and allows individuals to seek help without the potential shame and stigma associated with visiting a mental health facility. In an effort to reduce therapists' time and lower costs, there are more and more initiatives to supplement traditional in-person therapies with online modules, most often by adding some online element to the conventional treatment, either before or during the wait time, as an addition to regular in-person sessions during treatment, or after the treatment for relapse prevention. However, despite these efforts and the potential benefits of telemental health methods, they are still underutilized and often sub-optimally implemented.
The systematic review conducted by Connolly, Miller, Lindsay, and Bauer (2020) highlights many reasons explaining the reluctance of health-care professionals to deliver videoconference-based interventions due to perceived difficulties with certain aspects of telemental health. In this commentary, we aim to provide a more comprehensive picture of telemental health in which the findings of Connolly et al. (2020) can be articulated, encompassing interventions using information technologies, such as Internet-based treatments, blended interventions, and stepped-care models of treatment. For example, recent approaches in telemental health often combine online modules, face-to-face (F2F, or videoconferencing), and in-person sessions in order to maximize the advantages and minimize the disadvantages of each. These blended interventions have the potential to provide the flexibility required to address different concerns and needs. In order to create optimal sequence and combination of intervention elements, we need to understand the benefits and risks of each component as well as their combinations. We wish to address the concerns associated with the different forms of telemental health and highlight some solutions and needs for future research.
1 | CONCERNS REGARDING THE INTERPERSONAL ASPECTS OF WEB-BASED INTERVENTIONS

1.1 | Alliance
One major area of concern, as Connolly et al. (2020) point out, that prevents providers from engaging in telemental health interventions is its interpersonal aspect, specifically, their concerns regarding the ability of building proper alliance online. Whereas this concern has been found to correlate with a lack of intent to provide therapy online, other studies showed that these original concerns typically diminished or at least significantly decreased once the therapists gained first-hand experience with online therapy. In addition, clients' perspectives may be more positive in this regard, as Connolly et al. point out, clients often report better alliance in the treatment than their therapist.
In fact, various empirical studies document that the quality of the working alliance is excellent in videoconferencing, which could alleviate some concerns. However, some evidence suggests that negative biases, rather than actual difficulties in building alliance, influence concerns surrounding alliance. Rees and Stone (2005) randomly assigned 30 clinical psychologists to watch recordings of identical sessions conducted either in-person or over videoconference. They found that the videoconference group rated the therapeutic alliance, as well as the therapist's warmth and helpfulness, more poorly even though the sessions were identical. Thus, negative expectations surrounding online therapy may influence perceptions of alliance strength and therapist warmth rather than actual deficits in these areas.
1.2 | Communicating emotions, empathy
As Connolly et al. (2020) also point out, another major concern concerns the ability to efficiently communicate emotions between the therapist and the client due to a lack of nonverbal communication cues. This is an especially salient concern in text-based interventions (email, chat) where the lack of nonverbal cues can result in misunderstandings. At the same time, exclusively writing-based interventions have their advantages as well: Clients often appear to open up more easily and sooner about their problems than in F2F interactions, feel greater freedom to express themselves without judgment, and in general, they feel emotionally safer and less intimidated due to the lack of physical distance and a sense of impersonality of the online environment.
Whereas F2F modality enables clinicians to observe physical cues and thus preserves an important element of conventional therapy, the online channel still poses some challenges to sensing certain nonverbal cues, such as perceiving clients' body language, recognizing their social background during the call, or to perceive when they are ready to end the session. A common concern by clinicians is that the online setting sometimes also makes it more difficult to express warmth and empathy toward the client, as the online platform may filter out subtle nonverbal cues both ways.
However, several strategies have been recently proposed to compensate for the missing nonverbal cues. For example, Grondin, Lomanowska, and Jackson (2019) analyzed the various components of feeling and conveying empathy via online media and suggest that techniques like exaggeration of nonverbal behaviors and verbal clarification of the client's affective state can facilitate the empathic phenomenon. More profound and educative strategies, such as emphasizing the importance of focused attention and lack of distractions during sessions, could reduce the disadvantages. For example, the therapist can explain to clients the importance of taking the calls in a quiet, private place instead of while driving or having family obligations in parallel.
1.3 | Suitability to all clients and situations
Safety and legal concerns are common regarding interventions where there is a lack of physical proximity between provider and client, and raise the question whether telemental health interventions could fit everybody, as highlighted by Connolly et al. (2020). Accordingly, complex and severe client presentations, such as personality disorder, emotional instability, impulsivity, and past suicide attempts or other crisis situations, are often perceived by clinicians as not suitable for online therapy, including F2F modules (e.g., Simms, Gibson, & O'Donnell, 2011). Whereas these concerns are certainly legitimate, the practical implications are complex: First, clinicians are often unable to foresee sudden changes or detect dormant suicidal ideation in the clients at the beginning of treatment, and second, excluding more severe cases from telemental health does not only protect these clients, but also withholds available treatment from them.
2 | FUTURE DIRECTIONS TO ADDRESS CONCERNS REGARDING TELEMENTAL HEALTH

Providers' concerns represent a major barrier in the delivery of online interventions, and they also point to important areas for research and improvement. We will discuss three main areas, where improvement would be crucial for promoting the integration of telemental health into daily practice: research, training, and policy issues.
2.1 | Research
2.1.1 | Personalization of treatment
One area where significant improvement is needed is personalization of the treatments. Whereas it is clear that a “one-size-fits-all” approach cannot work in telemental health, there is a lack of research on the optimal treatment approach to the different client needs. First, we need to establish recommendations based on the purpose of the intervention, such as assessment, diagnosis, therapy, skills building, and so on. Different platforms could be helpful for different purposes, and an optimal combination of web-based and F2F modules, as well as blended interventions, needs to be established in order to provide interventions better suited for each purpose. For example, online modules with follow-up questions and comments by the therapist might be the most effective for psychoeducation, whereas a combination of an online assessment module and an added F2F session might be optimal for diagnostic purposes. Similarly, short-term manualized psychotherapy, in order to maximize its impact, may consist of online F2F sessions with added web-based psychoeducative modules and online exercises. For longer-term psychotherapy, combining videoconferencing with occasional in-person meetings might be optimal in alleviating concerns regarding rapport building. Finally, in some cases, telemental health could fit clients' needs better than clinic-based interventions. For example, in the treatment of child behavior problems, Comer et al. (2017) designed an innovative application of telemental health by providing real-time parental training via Bluetooth earpieces and videoconferencing directly in the clients' homes. Their results showed that the rate of excellent responders to treatment was higher in the remote treatment compared to the usual, clinic-based intervention.
In sum, identifying the most efficient combinations and sequence of telemental health intervention modules is paramount to guide the decision of supplementing, or in certain cases, replacing conventional forms of psychotherapy for various conditions. We have accumulating research evidence for the comparable efficacy of telemental health to traditional interventions for various psychopathologies, but we have yet to produce enough comparative studies to establish the optimal blend of online and in-person components based on the actual psychopathology.
Moreover, as we have seen, whereas clinicians intuitively consider less severe and complex psychopathology more fitting to exclusive online therapy, there is a lack of research that could provide tools, recommendations, and guidelines to ensure the appropriate screening and recognition of potential risks and crisis situations, as well as policies in place to respond to the emergency.
Furthermore, other client characteristics would also need to be considered when establishing an optimal combination and sequence of treatment elements. For example, age, Internet literacy, personal preferences, ability to express emotions and thoughts in writing, motivation, psychosocial problems, availability of a private, safe space to work, potential cognitive impairment, or comorbidity may affect the benefits of telemental heath intervention.
2.2 | Research to improve adherence
Although the few existing research trials comparing telemental health interventions to conventional ones indicate that the adherence rate is comparable, many online interventions have had problems with high dropout rates. Initial studies on specific conditions indicate that disease severity, treatment length, mismatch between module content and client needs, demands set in the online modules regarding reading and writing in each module, discrepancy between expectations, and the actual work required were some of the main factors leading to eventual nonadherence to online treatments. There have been efforts that proved to be at least partly effective in increasing adherence, such as adding phone calls and follow-up emails to online modules, increasing flexibility of the timing of sessions, or adding incentives for completing the intervention, but there is much research to be done in understanding the subjective reasons of dropping out and nonadherence to treatment.
Much of the research evidence indicates that many challenges of telemental health could be addressed by implementing more flexible, personalized treatments based on the purpose it serves and the client's characteristics in terms of psychopathology, needs, capabilities, personal resources, preferences, and expectations. Moreover, instead of a predetermined, fixed sequence, online modules and interventions could ideally be adjusted to the changing needs of the clients during treatment. By establishing effective screening and assessment procedures, as well as creating more flexible, less predefined treatment courses with adjustable treatment modules, we could take an important step toward providing optimal composition of treatment modules.
2.3 | Training
Available research evidence shows that within the realm of telemental health, providers' level of experience and qualifications is less important for the treatment outcome, but some skills specific to online interventions may play a significant role in the outcome as well as in clients' adherence. Training in the specificities of telemental health including issues discussed above, such as interpersonal communication, building rapport and alliance, optimal treatment composition, and risk assessment and management, would thus be crucial to improve the quality of services. Similarly, being knowledgeable about the benefits of telemental health and the factors affecting its efficiency can help improve clinicians' attitudes toward such interventions and alleviate some of the existing preconceptions. It is thus essential to incorporate training in online interventions into the graduate curriculum, as well as in the continuing education of clinicians to better respond to the increasing demand in telemental health interventions.
2.4 | Policy
Policymakers need to be aware that the use of telemental health services represents a paradigmatic shift in service delivery, where instead of physical proximity, services may be matched based on clients' needs and providers' expertise, largely independent of their physical location. However, despite the freedom they offer, the practical implementation of telemental health services often poses substantial challenges to providers. For example, Kenter et al. (2015) compared the cost and efficacy of a blended (in-person and online modules) versus a traditional in-person intervention for either depression or anxiety, where the two groups received the same number of in-person sessions and the blended intervention group received additional online modules. They found that there was no difference in symptom improvement between the two groups, but the significant increase in the number of treatment sessions in the blended intervention group resulted in significantly more treatment time and cost (Kenter et al., 2015). The authors explain the surprising results from the possibility of suboptimal integration of telemental health into routine care, highlighting the need for careful planning when implementing telehealth interventions.
Thus, while the integration of telemental health to routine care is fundamentally important, the way it is done might be equally crucial. At this point, we still need to learn so much more about the optimal use of telemental health and the factors that influence its efficacy. Further research will provide a new light on these issues and guide us in utilizing the new affordances granted by telemental health to its full potential. The important task of accumulating and translating research findings to actual clinical practice is still ahead of us.",
"32": "1 | INTRODUCTION

Telemental health, in which mental health care is provided from a distance, encompasses a broad range of practices, including the use of videoconferencing, e-mail, remote monitoring devices, and smartphone applications (Grady et al., 2011; Hailey, Roine, & Ohinmaa, 2008). Telemental health conducted via videoconferencing, referred to hereafter as TMH-V, provides real-time mental health care directly to patients and is rapidly expanding across private and publicly funded health-care systems worldwide (Australian Government Department of Health, 2018; Godleski, Darkins, & Peters, 2012; Lacktman & Rosen, 2017; O'Gorman, Hogenbirk, & Warry, 2015). Psychotherapy, medication management, and assessment services can be delivered via TMH-V to patients located at remote clinics or directly to patients' homes, improving access to care by reducing travel time and costs and providing specialty services to underserved locations (Fletcher et al., 2018; Hubley, Lynch, Schneck, Thomas, & Shore, 2016). TMH-V has shown robust clinical effectiveness in multiple trials, and outcomes were demonstrated as noninferior to in-person care in several studies (Bashshur, Shannon, Bashshur, & Yellowlees, 2016; Hilty et al., 2013; Hubley et al., 2016). Patients have reported high satisfaction with TMH-V overall, describing it as effective and efficient (Kruse et al., 2017).
The effectiveness and patient-level acceptance of TMH-V have been well-documented, and there is a growing body of literature examining characteristics of mental health providers using this technology in practice (Glueckauf et al., 2018). However, there has yet to be a systematic review of providers' attitudes toward TMH-V. This represents a critical gap in the literature, given that providers are often the gatekeepers of health-care innovations (Brooks, Turvey, & Augusterfer, 2013; Whitten & Mackert, 2005). If providers do not support the use of TMH-V, uptake may stagnate at the clinic level and patients may be unable to access TMH-V care. TMH-V has the potential to both benefit and inconvenience providers, and these factors may differentially impact providers' attitudes. For example, while TMH-V may make care more efficient and accessible and can increase providers' flexibility, it may also present new challenges with regard to navigating new technologies, coordinating care, scheduling appointments, and developing rapport with patients (Brooks et al., 2013).
It is therefore important to examine factors contributing to providers' attitudes toward TMH-V. The unified theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT; Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003) is a comprehensive framework that identifies four primary constructs underlying individuals' acceptance of a technological innovation: performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, and facilitating conditions. Performance expectancy is the extent to which an individual believes that an innovation will be useful and will have a relative advantage over other systems. According to the UTAUT, performance expectancy is the strongest predictor of intention to use a technology. Effort expectancy is defined as the perceived ease of using a given innovation. Social influence refers to perceptions that important people, such as organizational leadership, want the individual to use a new technology, and would view the individual positively for doing so. Facilitating conditions are defined as the perceived level of organizational and technical infrastructure in place to support use of the technology. The UTAUT posits that these four constructs can be moderated to varying extents by user age, gender, and experience using the technology, as well as the degree of voluntariness of adopting the innovation.
The current systematic review had three primary aims. The first was to assess the extent to which providers' overall attitudes toward TMH-V were positive or negative. The second aim was to situate these findings within the key constructs outlined in the UTAUT, namely the extent to which TMH-V was found to be useful, easy to use, encouraged by organizational leaders, and supported by necessary infrastructure. The third aim was to examine potential influences of provider age, gender, experience with TMH-V, and voluntariness of use on attitudes toward this innovation.
2 | METHODS

We conducted a comprehensive review of the English-language, peer-reviewed literature on providers' attitudes toward TMH-V, published between January 2000 and June 2019 within three databases: PubMed, CINAHL, and Embase. Each subsequent database search filtered out results from the previous databases to prevent duplicates. Our initial search strategy required articles to contain a term pertaining to TMH-V as well as a term referring to providers or attitudes/experiences within their titles and/or abstracts. The complete list of searched terms is as follows (with asterisks indicating that any words beginning with that string of letters were included):
TMH-V terms: telemental health, tele-mental health, telepsychiatry, telepsychotherapy, telepsychology, teletherapy, e-therapy, online therapy, online counseling, OR [(telehealth, telemedicine, telecare, video*, communication tech*) AND (psych*, mental*)]
Provider terms: provider*, clinician*, psychiatrist*, psychologist*, stakeholder*, nurse*, professional*, physician*, social work*, personnel*
Attitude terms: attitude*, perception*, experience*, interest*, opinion*, view*, utilization, satisfaction
The first author screened the titles and abstracts of the articles resulting from this search and identified those appropriate for full-text review. To meet criteria for inclusion with this review, articles were required to include the following:
Information regarding providers' attitudes toward or experiences using TMH-V to provide direct, real-time clinical care to patients. Consulting with another provider by videoconference, or the use of alternative technologies such as secure messaging, store and forward communications, or web-based treatment protocols did not qualify.
Information from the perspective of the provider who conducted/would be conducting the TMH-V session with the patient versus from a primary care or emergency room doctor requesting a TMH-V consult.
Qualitative and/or quantitative data collected using an explicitly identified measure, such as a survey or semi-structured interview. Articles that did not indicate and describe the measure used to collect their data were excluded.
At least four providers meeting the above criteria were sampled. Providers could be of varying disciplines. This number was chosen in an attempt to achieve balance between including as many high-quality studies as possible, while also helping ensure that the interpretations of findings were reasonably generalizable to the broader population of mental health providers.
2.1 | Reliability
The first author identified a subset of 10 articles from within the 86 identified for full-text review, some of which the first author had determined to meet inclusion criteria, others of which were ultimately excluded. These articles were independently scored as eligible or ineligible by co-authors CJM and MSB. Fleiss's kappa for the three raters within this subset of manuscripts was .829, indicating excellent interrater reliability. SLC, CJM, and MSB then met for a consensus meeting in which the inclusion/exclusion of all 86 articles was discussed, guided by a document compiled by SLC including detailed summaries of the articles' study designs, participants, and findings. The group reached consensus on the 38 articles included in the final sample.
2.2 | Analytic approach
The following information was reported for each included study: the number, discipline, and extent of TMH-V experience of providers sampled, the type of services provided through TMH-V, characteristics of the patient population, the location at which patients received TMH-V care, the measures used to assess providers' attitudes, and a brief summary of main findings. TMH-V experience was defined as whether or not providers had ever conducted a TMH-V session with a patient. Risk for selection bias, performance bias, detection bias, attrition bias, and selective reporting bias was assessed for all studies according to Cochrane Collaboration guidelines (Higgins & Green, 2011).
At the broadest level, it was determined whether providers' overall attitudes toward TMH-V were reported as primarily positive or negative within each study, when that information was available. Each article was then coded for the presence of the four primary UTAUT constructs within provider attitude data: Performance expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence, facilitating conditions, and subconstructs were identified. The frequency with which subconstructs were endorsed, and the percentage of all articles that included each subconstruct were then calculated, and findings were summarized across articles. Next, based on the UTAUT model, the potential moderating role of gender, age, experience, and voluntariness of use was considered within provider attitude data. Articles were coded as to whether they presented findings involving any of these moderators. Experience was the only moderator discussed across multiple articles; these results were summarized across articles. Additional distinctions in providers' attitudes not encompassed in the above sections were then coded and summarized.
3 | RESULTS

The initial search strategy resulted in 739 articles. Eighty-six articles were identified as appropriate for full-text review after title and abstract screening (see modified PRISMA diagram, Figure 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Modified PRISMA diagram
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Of these 86 articles, 38 ultimately met criteria for inclusion with this review (Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Summary of articles included in systematic review (N = 38)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Twenty-eight studies (74%) assessed providers' attitudes toward specific modes of TMH-V treatment, for which the patient population and the location of patients' care were identified; the remaining ten studies (26%) were surveys of providers' attitudes toward TMH-V more generally. Seventeen studies exclusively sampled providers with TMH-V experience (45%), 19 studies included providers both with and without experience (50%), and two studies exclusively sampled providers with no experience (5%). TMH-V was described as having various uses, including providing psychotherapy (22/38, 58%), short-term consultation and assessment (17/38, 45%), and medication management (12/35, 34%). Twenty-eight studies specified the locations at which patients received TMH-V care, including hospitals and clinics (21/28, 75%), within their homes (5/28, 18%), or in other locations, including schools, youth centers, crisis homes, or community centers (4/28, 14%). Fifteen studies involved the treatment of child and adolescent patients (39%), ten included military personnel/veterans (26%), and three included indigenous populations (8%). Eighteen studies (47%) were conducted outside of the United States, including Canada (7/38, 18%), Australia (5/38, 13%), and the United Kingdom (3/38, 8%). One study was conducted in each of the following countries: China, Finland, Italy, and Norway.
3.1 | Overall attitudes toward TMH-V
3.1.1 | Positive attitudes
Overall attitudes toward TMH-V were largely positive (Adler, Pritchett, Kauth, & Nadorff, 2014; Baird, Whitney, & Caedo, 2018; Brooks, Manson, Bair, Dailey, & Shore, 2012; Cunningham, Connors, Lever, & Stephan, 2013; Levy & Strachan, 2013; Mitchell, MacLaren, Morton, & Carachi, 2009; Moreau et al., 2018; Whitten & Kuwahara, 2004; Wynn, Bergvik, Pettersen, & Fossum, 2012), such that providers were satisfied with TMH-V (Interian, King, St. Hill, Robinson, & Damschroder, 2017; Lindsay et al., 2017; Mayworm et al., 2019; Ruskin et al., 2004) and favorable toward its use (Cipolletta & Mocellin, 2018; Moreau et al., 2018), describing it as important (Glover, Williams, Hazlett, & Campbell, 2013; Volpe, Boydell, & Pignatiello, 2013) and an acceptable mode of treatment delivery (Elford et al., 2001, 2000; Thomas et al., 2017). These positive opinions were observed across types of services provided, location of TMH-V care, and patient populations.
Providers' positive attitudes most frequently included reference to the UTAUT construct of performance expectancy, with multiple articles describing the innovation as being effective (Jameson, Farmer, Head, Fortney, & Teal, 2011; Perle, Burt, & Higgins, 2014; Starling & Foley, 2006) and useful (Gelber, 2001; Gibson, O'Donnell, Coulson, & Kakepetum-Scghultz, 2011; Glueckauf et al., 2018; Kopel, Nunn, & Dossetor, 2001; Simms, Gibson, & O'Donnell, 2011). One statistical analysis found that providers' perception of usefulness was the most important factor in determining intention to use TMH-V based on questionnaire data (Monthuy-Blanc, Bouchard, Maïano, & Seguin, 2013), consistent with UTAUT hypotheses (Venkatesh et al., 2003). Six subconstructs of performance expectancy were identified (Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Positive aspects of TMH-V generated by providers
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
The most commonly endorsed subconstruct was increasing access to care, such as for patients in remote locations, with disabilities or illnesses that made travel difficult, or with child or elder care responsibilities, as well as allowing for care during inclement weather (16/38, 42%; see Table 2 for included studies). The second most frequently endorsed benefit was saving time and money and increasing efficiency of services (12/38, 32%). Multiple articles also shared provider sentiments that TMH-V could have advantages over in-person care in some circumstances, such as by increasing patient comfort and decreasing inhibition when discussing sensitive subjects including trauma (8/38, 21%). Several of these advantages over in-person care were specific to providing TMH-V directly to patients' homes versus to another clinic (Gordon, Wang, & Tune, 2015; Lindsay et al., 2017). These included allowing care to be received discreetly and privately at home, offering a window into a patient's living environment, and serving as a stepping stone into care for avoidant patients. Receiving feedback that patients liked TMH-V was also noted as a positive aspect (6/38, 16%). TMH-V was described as providing increased flexibility, such as by allowing providers to work from different locations or check in more easily with high-risk patients (4/38, 11%). TMH-V was also mentioned as providing new job opportunities for providers, expanding the reach of their work, and facilitating increased collaboration with other clinicians (3/38, 8%).
Regarding effort expectancy, multiple articles reported that providers found TMH-V to be easy to use (7/38, 18%). The remaining two constructs were discussed less frequently. In terms of social influence, several articles described the positive impact of supportive leadership on providers' attitudes toward TMH-V (3/38, 8%). Facilitating conditions, such as having strong technical support services, were also mentioned in several articles (4/38, 11%).
3.1.2 | Negative attitudes
Although overall attitudes toward TMH-V were largely positive, there were several exceptions. A minority of psychiatrists (4 of 11) reported being satisfied providing medication management through TMH-V in one study (Wagnild, Leenknecht, & Zauher, 2006). They described technological and scheduling barriers, perceptions of TMH-V as impersonal, and reinforcement of patients' social isolation as drawbacks. Two studies reported difficulty recruiting clinicians to provide TMH-V care (Adler et al., 2014; Shulman, John, & Kane, 2017). Reasons for providers opting to not participate included lack of interest (Adler et al., 2014) and concerns about technological issues (Shulman et al., 2017); both studies noted that perceptions of extra effort and hassle associated with TMH-V were deterrents.
Multiple drawbacks to TMH-V use were noted regarding performance expectancy, including articles that reported positive attitudes toward TMH-V overall. Six subconstructs were identified, and the frequency with which they were endorsed is reported in Table 3.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Negative aspects of TMH-V generated by providers
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Concerns were often raised regarding TMH-V being impersonal or interfering with the therapeutic relationship. Difficulties detecting nonverbal cues such as fidgeting or crying, poor hygiene, or signs of intoxication were noted, along with trouble maintaining eye contact and disruptions to conversation flow (19/38, 50%; see Table 3 for included studies). Safety and legal concerns were common, including the inability to be physically present to assess for risk and coordinate patient transfer to a hospital; some providers questioned their liability in the case of a crisis and the limitations of their licenses, such as whether they could legally see a patient via TMH-V across state lines (13/38, 34%). Some providers felt that patients would not like using the TMH-V modality as compared to in-person visits (8/38, 21%). A lack of provider knowledge regarding TMH-V security and confidentiality was noted in several articles (7/38, 18%). Providers also raised the possibility that certain patients, such as those with hearing or visual impairments, or those who are socially isolated or high risk, would not be appropriate for TMH-V care (5/38, 13%). Finally, some noted an inability to conduct a thorough assessment, including a physical examination, using TMH-V (6/38, 16%).
The most frequently endorsed concern fell within the construct of effort expectancy and involved technological problems, including suboptimal audio and video quality, insufficient bandwidth to support videoconferencing, and malfunctions during treatment sessions (23/38, 61%). TMH-V was also often associated with increased workload and hassle due to factors such as equipment setup and additional scheduling processes (16/38, 42%). With respect to social influence, two studies (5%) mentioned the negative impact of having poor communication or support from leadership regarding TMH-V. In terms of facilitating conditions, several articles described a need for technical support and training (9/38, 24%), as well as having limited access to TMH-V equipment, clinic space, and funding (6/38, 16%).
3.2 | Attitude variability related to extent of TMH-V experience
3.2.1 | Users versus nonusers
Several studies drew comparisons between users and nonusers of TMH-V within their samples. Compared to those with no experience, users had more positive attitudes toward TMH-V (Adler et al., 2014; Gilmore & Ward-Ciesielski, 2019) and expressed more confidence regarding their ability to provide care through TMH-V (Adler et al., 2014; Austen & McGrath, 2006). Providers with TMH-V experience were less likely to cite drawbacks to use such as staffing and credentialing concerns (Adler et al., 2014) or difficulties operating the technology, managing high-risk patients, or developing a therapeutic alliance (Interian et al., 2017). Predictors of increased use of TMH-V included finding the technology easy to use and having a history of training (Gibson et al., 2011; Glover et al., 2013; Simms et al., 2011) as well as having more years in practice (Gilmore & Ward-Ciesielski, 2019; Simms et al., 2011). A study of psychiatry residents found that those in rural as opposed to urban settings were more likely to plan on using TMH-V after residency (Glover et al., 2013). One study noted that younger age was related to TMH-V use (Gilmore & Ward-Ciesielski, 2019); however, more years in practice was also reported as predictive of TMH-V use, making this finding difficult to interpret given that these variables would likely be negatively correlated.
3.2.2 | Preuse versus postuse
Although relatively few studies assessed providers' attitudes before and after TMH-V use, the majority revealed an increase in positive sentiments with experience. Studies reported increases in positive opinions (Brooks et al., 2012; Whitten & Kuwahara, 2004), interest (Glover et al., 2013), comfort level (Gelber, 2001), and ease of use of the technology (Gibson et al., 2011), as well as decreases in providers' skepticism (Elford et al., 2000) and apprehension (Brooks et al., 2012) following use. Several studies reported that providers were pleasantly surprised after trying TMH-V, noting that it was “much better than I thought it would be” (Elford et al., 2000), and caused less disruption to clinical care (Adler et al., 2014) and rapport development (Lindsay et al., 2017) than anticipated. Multiple studies noted that providers were surprised by their patients' generally positive attitudes toward TMH-V (Adler et al., 2014; Brooks et al., 2012; Kopel et al., 2001; Newman, Bidargaddi, & Schrader, 2016), their willingness to participate, and the speed at which they adapted to this new mode of treatment delivery (Whitten & Kuwahara, 2004). In contrast, one qualitative study noted that two providers characterized TMH-V consultations as “twice as hard” to conduct as in-person sessions because of poor audio and video quality; they described being unable to detect nonverbal cues and needing to use shorter sentences and exaggerated gestures (Starling & Foley, 2006). However, it is worth noting that this study was published in 2006 and that the technology being evaluated is likely not representative of the current quality of TMH-V platforms.
Some providers with TMH-V experience noted that the benefits of TMH-V outweighed its various drawbacks and described the development of strategies and workarounds to address barriers encountered during use (Gibson et al., 2011; Lindsay et al., 2017; Simms et al., 2011). These included developing relationships with local law enforcement and hospitals to implement safety protocols in the case of a patient emergency, panning the camera around the provider's treatment room to reassure wary patients that no one else was overhearing their confidential session, or completing the remainder of a session by phone if the video connection unexpectedly failed.
3.3 | Additional distinctions in providers' attitudes
3.3.1 | Provider satisfaction with TMH-V versus in-person care
Most studies comparing providers' opinions toward TMH-V and in-person care found the latter to be more desirable. Providers reported preferring in-person care when completing child assessments and interventions (Elford et al., 2000; Levy & Strachan, 2013), and psychodynamic therapists described TMH-V as being slightly less effective than in-person sessions (Gordon et al., 2015). A minority of psychiatry residents with TMH-V experience felt that TMH-V was equal to face-to-face encounters (34%; 40% noted that it was not equal, and 26% were neutral; Glover et al., 2013). Providers conducted both TMH-V and in-person sessions in four intervention studies included in this review: a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of psychologists completing a cognitive behavioral therapy protocol for bulimia (Ertelt et al., 2011), an RCT of psychiatrists providing medication management and supportive counseling (Ruskin et al., 2004), a non-RCT in which psychologists conducted clinical intake interviews (Schopp, Johnstone, & Merrell, 2000), and a non-RCT in which psychiatrists provided school-based medication management and assessment to children (Mayworm et al., 2019). In-person sessions were rated significantly higher in terms of provider satisfaction (Mayworm et al., 2019; Ruskin et al., 2004; Schopp et al., 2000), as well as providers' perception of goal formation, task completion, and development of a therapeutic bond (Ertelt et al., 2011). Three of these four studies shared that, despite being significantly lower than in-person scores, TMH-V ratings remained high (Ertelt et al., 2011; Mayworm et al., 2019; Ruskin et al., 2004). Several studies reported that providers found TMH-V to be adequate (Kopel et al., 2001), equivalent (Elford et al., 2001), or an acceptable alternative (Elford et al., 2000; Thomas et al., 2017) to in-person sessions, noting that there was “little to no difference” in care (Volpe et al., 2013). It is notable that these studies examined short-term consultation or assessment services delivered via TMH-V versus longer term psychotherapy or medication management.
3.3.2 | TMH-V provider satisfaction as compared to patients and referring providers
Studies that compared provider and patient attitudes toward TMH-V found patients to be more satisfied than providers on average (Cruz, Krupinski, Lopez, & Weinstein, 2005; Shulman et al., 2017; Thomas et al., 2017). Providers rated working alliance measures as lower for TMH-V versus in-person sessions of a cognitive behavioral therapy protocol, while there were no significant differences in patient-rated scores between modalities (Ertelt et al., 2011). Another study reported that providers found technical difficulties to be more problematic and burdensome than patients; the authors posited that patients were more accustomed to experiencing delays when receiving health care as compared to providers (Schopp et al., 2000). In a study of emergency room providers who requested TMH-V consultation from a psychiatrist or social worker at a remote hospital, the providers requesting the patient consultation were more satisfied with the service than the providers conducting the TMH-V session (Thomas et al., 2017). It was hypothesized that the workflow of those providing TMH-V consultation was impacted more than the workflow of the requesting providers.
3.4 | Risk of bias
There is the risk of publication bias within the current review, such that negative or contradictory findings regarding providers' attitudes toward TMH-V may have been omitted from results sections or may have precluded publication of completed research altogether. A risk of selection bias was identified within all included studies. Specifically, it is possible that the providers who opted to complete TMH-V surveys or participate in TMH-V intervention protocols may be categorically different from providers who opted out. Only one study (Shulman et al., 2017) reported the number of providers who elected to participate relative to the total number approached. Performance bias can occur within unblinded studies and refers to the provision of increased attention to the experimental group (i.e., those receiving TMH-V) as compared to the control group, beyond the scope of the actual intervention. Four studies assigned patients to TMH-V or in-person care (Ertelt et al., 2011; Mayworm et al., 2019; Ruskin et al., 2004; Schopp et al., 2000); providers in these studies may have given additional attention to patients in the TMH-V condition given the novelty of this modality, which could have impacted their subsequent perceptions of TMH-V effectiveness. Performance bias was also possible in the multiple other intervention studies without an in-person control condition, as providers may have put more effort into TMH-V sessions conducted within the context of a research study. Detection bias is also inevitable in this context, given that the main outcomes of this review are providers' attitudes toward using TMH-V, preventing any sort of blinding regarding treatment condition when considering outcomes. Attrition bias is a significant concern among the included intervention studies. Only one study (Adler et al., 2014) reported on the observed attrition rate of therapists, with attrition here referring to inability to ultimately provide TMH-V care due to clinic and organization-level barriers. The remaining studies only included providers who participated in the full intervention within their samples, inviting the possibility that providers who ultimately dropped out of the intervention or were unable to provide TMH-V were not accounted for in analyses. Selective reporting bias is also likely given that many included studies did not clearly specify outcomes of interest within their analytic plans.
4 | DISCUSSION

The current systematic review revealed a diverse and growing literature examining providers' attitudes toward TMH-V, and findings were positive overall. TMH-V was described as improving access to care for patients, increasing efficiency of services, saving time and money, and being more effective than in-person care in some circumstances. Additional benefits included TMH-V being easy to use, well-received by patients, supported by organizational leadership, and facilitated by strong training and technical support systems. While few articles reported negative overall attitudes toward TMH-V, many drawbacks to use were mentioned across studies. Technological difficulties were the most common concern and were reported in the majority of articles. Increased hassle and workload were also frequently mentioned. Most studies noted that TMH-V could feel impersonal, interfere with the therapeutic relationship, or impede the detection of nonverbal cues. Some providers reported beliefs that patients would not like TMH-V or that certain patients would not be appropriate to receive care remotely. Safety, security, liability, and confidentiality concerns were noted, as was the difficulty of conducting a thorough assessment via TMH-V. Lack of facilitating conditions, including training and technical support, was also endorsed. Poor support from leadership was a less frequently mentioned contributor to negative attitudes.
This finding that overall attitudes toward TMH-V were positive despite the presence of many drawbacks suggests that the relative weights of its benefits and disadvantages are not equal. Specifically, the perceived benefits of increasing efficiency, flexibility, and access to care for patients may offset the relative impersonality of TMH-V as well as its technological difficulties and increased provider burden. This finding aligns with the UTAUT, which posits that the performance expectancy of an innovation is the most significant predictor of its acceptance (Venkatesh et al., 2003).
Current findings also suggest a relationship between experience using TMH-V and providers' attitudes. Specifically, providers with experience using TMH-V reported more acceptance of the modality than nonusers. A trend emerged in which providers experienced increases in positive sentiments upon using TMH-V, including being, “pleasantly surprised” by its functionality and ease of use (Adler et al., 2014; Elford et al., 2000; Lindsay et al., 2017). These findings, while tentative, align with UTAUT predictions, such that the perceived effort required to use an innovation declines following experience interacting with and adjusting to the technology (Venkatesh et al., 2003). In keeping with this theory, workflow modifications would become practiced over time and require less hassle on the part of the provider. Furthermore, experienced providers described developing strategies and workarounds to address barriers to use. This suggests that with experience, providers can mitigate some of the negative aspects of TMH-V, contributing to more positive overall attitudes toward the innovation.
However, while providers' attitudes toward TMH-V tended to improve with experience, they still generally displayed a preference for conducting appointments in person versus via TMH-V. The exception to this finding involved short-term consultation and assessment procedures, in which TMH-V was deemed largely equivalent to in-person sessions. Therefore, TMH-V satisfaction may vary based on the nature of services being provided. For example, difficulties establishing a therapeutic alliance from behind a screen may have a larger impact within longer term care, in which the alliance develops over time and is an important predictor of therapy success (Martin, Garske, & Davis, 2000), as compared to brief patient interactions that do not involve follow-up. These difficulties may particularly impact psychologists, who may be more likely to have frequent and longer sessions with patients (e.g., weekly evidence-based treatment protocols) as opposed to providers primarily offering brief consultations or periodic medication management appointments. Findings emphasize the importance of optimizing audio and video quality to improve the ability to connect with patients via TMH-V, by increasing detection of subtle nonverbal cues and minimizing audio and video lags that can disrupt conversation flow. Through training, providers can also be made aware of these drawbacks and develop new strategies, for instance adjusting camera placement to ensure proper angles and lighting to best see and be seen by the patient, or maintaining a low threshold to inquire about recent substance use, given the greater difficulty of detecting intoxication remotely (Shore, 2013). That being said, there may be instances in which an in-person appointment is deemed necessary to conduct a thorough assessment (e.g., to measure vital signs if the patient does not have a home monitoring device such as a personal blood pressure cuff). This will likely be a greater barrier to prescribing clinicians or behavioral medicine specialists as opposed to those who do not conduct physical examinations as part of their treatment protocols.
Although TMH-V satisfaction levels were high overall, providers reported lower satisfaction than their patients. It is possible that the perceived drawbacks of establishing a therapeutic relationship via TMH-V may be more salient to providers than to patients, as noted in one study in which providers reported lower working alliance scores for TMH-V versus in-person sessions, while patient scores did not differ across modalities (Ertelt et al., 2011). The degree of effort required to use TMH-V also likely contributes to observed discrepancies in satisfaction. TMH-V represents a shift in the care model, such that providers are expected to reach out to their patients, versus their patients being expected to come to their office, a dynamic that redistributes effort expenditures and may in turn affect satisfaction. Indeed, TMH-V is more likely to impose burdens on providers—in terms of undergoing training and integrating new technologies and processes into their preexisting workflows—as compared to patients, for whom TMH-V is intended to decrease the more burdensome aspects of care. Furthermore, patients may be more accustomed to encountering delays and adapting to unfamiliar systems when receiving care as compared to their providers (Schopp et al., 2000).
Several aspects of the UTAUT were notably underrepresented within the reviewed articles. Although many articles discussed the moderating role of experience, there was little to no information shared regarding the role of gender, age, and voluntariness of use on providers' acceptance of TMH-V. Future research should aim to examine these factors as they may influence attitudes toward TMH-V adoption. Indeed, findings of demographic differences within the broader mental health technology literature are complex and not consistent across studies (Glueckauf et al., 2018; McMinn, Bearse, Heyne, Smithberger, & Erb, 2011). There was also relatively little information provided regarding social influence from leadership or contextual factors. The role of organizational support can significantly influence providers' attitudes, as discussed within established implementation frameworks (e.g., CFIR; Damschroder et al., 2009). Indeed, one study in the current review emphasized the importance of developing an organization-level “telehealth culture” involving information sharing across providers, policy development, training, and system-wide changes in administrative systems and staffing to ensure successful and sustained uptake of TMH-V (Newman et al., 2016).
Developing a TMH-V implementation plan, including formalized education, training, and supervision, as well as the involvement of experienced facilitators, can help to increase provider buy-in, enthusiasm, and confidence navigating this new technology (Fletcher et al., 2018). These strategies will be especially important to consider when moving beyond small-scale trials and toward the widespread integration of TMH-V into general practice. Ideally, successive generations of providers will receive TMH-V education and training as part of their graduate programs, which will increase the ubiquity of these services. However, postgraduate training is necessary to ensure that current providers gain comfort and experience navigating this technology and that these skills are maintained over time as technologies continue to evolve. It is notable that few of the reviewed studies described the nature and extent of TMH-V education and training received by providers. Future studies should prioritize examination of these factors and their influence on providers' attitudes toward TMH-V.
Limitations to the current conclusions must be noted, particularly regarding the observed relationship between attitudes toward TMH-V and experience. Importantly, there is no way to determine the causality of provider sentiments; for instance, providers with more positive a priori opinions toward TMH-V or who experienced fewer barriers to use may have been more likely to ultimately use TMH-V. Alternatively, use of TMH-V may have subsequently increased providers' positive opinions. Similarly, selection bias may exist in study designs; for instance, providers with more positive attitudes toward TMH-V may have been more likely to participate in the included studies, while providers who were unable to integrate TMH-V into their practice, who discontinued TMH-V use, or who had negative attitudes overall may not be adequately represented. In addition, many articles did not distinguish between providers with or without TMH-V experience when describing attitudes toward use. This represents a significant limitation as the potential moderating role of experience could not be examined, such as whether there was variation in the number or type of drawbacks endorsed by these groups. Furthermore, measures of providers' attitudes and satisfaction with TMH-V were highly variable across studies as there is no “gold standard” measurement of these constructs, which prevents direct comparison of findings and limits overall interpretations. Additional limitations include the omission of non-English-language publications and the small sample sizes of some of the included studies. Indeed, the experience of implementing and using TMH-V within a small trial may be very different from attempts to integrate TMH-V into larger and more complex settings. Although a consensus approach was used to determine article inclusion, the systematic review analyses were conducted by the first author and did not involve additional formal consensus procedures, which could be considered a limitation. However, all co-authors provided critical feedback regarding the analytic plan and presentation of current findings. Finally, 12 of the included studies were published over 10 years ago, and given the time taken to conduct and publish research, many of the more recent studies are likely also referring to technologies that are now somewhat outdated. Given the fast-moving pace of innovation, it is possible that some of the drawbacks discussed in this review may be specific to older TMH-V equipment and processes that have since been refined. This in turn limits the potential generalizability of these findings to current conditions and emphasizes the need for ongoing review of the literature as TMH-V technology continues to evolve and improve.
Although the current review focused on TMH-V, it is important to note that additional technologies may fall within the domain of telemental health, including e-mail, smartphone apps, message boards, or web-based therapy protocols. Two of the studies included in the current review surveyed providers' attitudes toward telemental health technologies more broadly, with only TMH-V results reported here (Cipolletta & Mocellin, 2018; Glueckauf et al., 2018). Future work should aim to synthesize findings from papers that evaluate multiple forms of telemental health concurrently, in order to examine variation in provider attitudes based on mental health technology type. Future studies should also examine whether there may be discipline-level variability in providers' attitudes toward TMH-V that may relate to differences in typical encounter characteristics; for instance, whether prescribing clinicians with less frequent and shorter appointments with their patients may have more positive views toward TMH-V than psychologists with longer and more frequent sessions.
The finding that providers' positivity toward TMH-V may have outweighed various barriers to use could have important implications when attempting to implement this technology in practice. If providers believe that using TMH-V will improve overall access to care and ultimately increase efficiency and flexibility, they may be more willing to accept initial increases in hassle and disruptions in workflow, as well as an altered quality of connection with patients. This distinction is important to consider when introducing TMH-V to providers, specifically preparing providers for the inevitable growing pains of adopting this new technology, but emphasizing the net benefits that TMH-V may provide to their patients and themselves with sustained use.
The balance between perceived benefits and drawbacks of TMH-V among providers is also likely to continually shift in response to rapid advances occurring in the field. Improvements in the quality of communication via TMH-V, due to strengthened broadband connectivity and increasingly sophisticated video and audio technologies, may help to lessen the relative disadvantages of connecting with a patient from behind a screen (Brooks et al., 2013). With continued use and troubleshooting, TMH-V will ideally become more seamlessly integrated into electronic health record, scheduling, and billing platforms, which would relieve a substantial amount of staff burden. In addition, the introduction of legislation allowing for the wider provision of telehealth, such as a recently enacted bill allowing TMH-V to occur across state lines within the Veterans Health Administration, as well as similar legislation within the Department of Defense, will decrease logistical barriers to care (Brooks et al., 2013; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2018; Zur, 2019). State laws requiring insurers to reimburse TMH-V appointments to the same extent as in-person care (i.e., parity laws) will also be critical in increasing uptake, as will the relaxation of mandates in some states requiring out-of-state providers to obtain special licenses to provide telehealth services (Adler-Milstein, Kvedar, & Bates, 2014). In fact, a Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT), which would provide a streamlined certification process for psychologists to conduct TMH-V across state lines, is currently in development (Wicklund, 2019b); similar compacts have already taken effect for physicians and nurses across multiple states (Wicklund, 2019a). The development and dissemination of established clinical competencies and guidelines for care will also likely help to standardize TMH-V practices and increase provider confidence (Hilty, Maheu, Drude, & Hertlein, 2018; Shore et al., 2018). Furthermore, providers' comfort interacting with patients via TMH-V may continue to increase as videoconferencing becomes ubiquitous across multiple domains, from coordinating remote work meetings to connecting with family members using smartphone video chat features.
It is also worth noting that many of the most unique strengths of TMH-V involve providing services directly to patients' homes versus to remote clinics—for instance allowing immobile and severely ill patients to receive care, providing a window into a patients' living environment, and serving as a stepping stone into services for avoidant or highly anxious patients (Fletcher et al., 2018; Gordon et al., 2015; Lindsay et al., 2017). Advancements in technology, including improved wireless connectivity and facilitated access to smartphones and tablets, will allow more TMH-V to take place within patients' homes, which may further increase the relative advantages of this modality. Only five of the included studies in this review delivered TMH-V to patients' homes, and four of those studies were published in the past three years, highlighting the relative novelty of this modality and the need for additional research to understand possible effects of TMH-V delivery location (e.g., clinic or home) on provider and patient perceptions as well as clinical outcomes.
Yet importantly, current findings reveal that providers prefer in-person contact when given the choice. It therefore remains likely that regardless of future advancements in technology, in-person contact will continue to be preferred by many providers and patients when it is easily accessible. As such, TMH-V can be viewed as one of many effective treatment modalities whose relative advantage will vary depending on the unique circumstances of each clinical contact. For some patients with significant barriers to receiving in-person care, TMH-V technology may represent the first and only way in which they are able to undergo therapy. Even if a provider may generally prefer in-person appointments when given the choice, the benefit of providing therapy via TMH-V to a patient who otherwise would receive none is clear. A hybrid model of care may be ideal in other cases, such that patients receive a combination of in-person and TMH-V sessions based on changing needs over the course of therapy (Yellowlees & Nafiz, 2010). These hybrid care structures will likely become more common as TMH-V uptake increases, and their use and effectiveness should be studied.
In sum, the current review revealed that providers' attitudes toward TMH-V are positive overall, despite the acknowledgment of multiple drawbacks to its use. This finding suggests that the relative advantages of TMH-V in certain circumstances, such as increasing access to care where services are limited, may outweigh its various disadvantages from the provider perspective. Gaining experience conducting TMH-V sessions with patients may lessen perceived drawbacks of use and foster the development of strategies and workarounds to improve care delivery. As health-care systems increasingly prioritize TMH-V, it will be crucial to consider providers' attitudes and perspectives when working to facilitate uptake, as they will play a key role in the successful implementation of this innovation.",
"33": "In addition to coping with the stresses of a global pandemic, mental health clinicians have had to rapidly transition to telemental health (TMH) services to protect themselves and their clients. TMH is a feasible and effective alternative to traditional in-person care, and has some unique benefits, such as opportunities for enhanced ecological validity of treatment that happens in the client’s “real world” settings (Comer, 2015). This new way of working together, however, presents a significant change in communication with the loss of the physical intimacy of face-to-face therapy. While TMH does not appear to be a barrier to building the therapeutic relationship, and may even afford opportunities for improved therapeutic alliance and empathy (see Comer & Timmons, 2019), it does require new strategies for the clinician to maintain that relationship (Chakrabarti, 2015; Grondin, Lomanowska, & Jackson, 2019; Hilty, Randhawa, Maheu, McKean, & Pantera, 2019). In addition, given the increased risk that vulnerable clients may deteriorate because of the stresses of the COVID-19 outbreak (e.g., social isolation, financial stress), strong communication and engagement in treatment is more important than ever. Telemental health measurement-based care (tMBC) is an ideal complement to enhance ongoing monitoring, shared understanding, and treatment engagement in the context of the virtual encounter. MBC is founded upon the premise that high-quality and continuous feedback will improve clinician competency and enhance client outcomes (Claiborn & Goodyear, 2005). In the shifting landscape of the COVID-19 crisis, and with the sudden transition to TMH, tMBC can be a crucial part of boosting confidence and competence as clinicians adjust to the new normal of technology-enabled mental health care.
tMBC Is a Patient-Centered Communication Tool

Operationalized as the systematic collection of assessment data, typically before or during sessions, to monitor treatment progress and inform clinical decision-making (Scott & Lewis, 2015), MBC is considered an evidence-based practice that is transtheoretical and transdiagnostic, with broad applicability across mental health settings, treatment types, and populations (APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice, 2006). Lewis and colleagues (2019) recently summarized the results of nine systematic reviews and meta-analyses and concluded that MBC leads to improved client outcomes, particularly for those identified as not responding to treatment.
The foundation of MBC is client- and/or caregiver-reported measures of symptoms, but the utility of MBC may be enhanced with other measures, such as the therapeutic alliance (Goldberg et al., 2019) or skill confidence and use (Hooke & Page, 2017). When MBC is delivered on a web-based platform, the interpreted assessment feedback can be viewed in real time by clinicians, allowing them to tailor care in the moment based on any unexpected developments or lack of progress. As a form of patient-centered communication (Carlier et al., 2012), MBC feedback reports provide a concrete, visual pathway to promote shared understanding.
While the mechanisms of action of MBC have not been clearly demonstrated empirically, it likely influences care at the client, clinician, and organizational levels. At the client level, therapeutic assessment theory (Finn & Tonsager, 1997) posits that assessment and feedback enhance outcomes by improving the client’s understanding of their problems, their treatment engagement, and the therapeutic alliance. At the clinician level, the contextual feedback intervention theory (Riemer & Bickman, 2011) proposes that the recognition of a discrepancy between treatment goals and client status leads to cognitive dissonance, which then prompts the clinician to take action. For example, MBC has been found to contribute to greater speed and responsivity of clinician’s addressing acute client and/or caregiver problems (Douglas et al., 2015). MBC feedback also informs case conceptualization and supervision. At the organizational level, MBC can support continuous quality improvement by providing a “golden thread” of client-level data aggregated from the bottom up throughout the agency to inform organizational decision-making (Douglas, Button, & Casey, 2016).
Practical Recommendations for tMBC

Aided by a review of relevant practice guidelines for telemental health (e.g., Comer & Myers, 2016; Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013; Maheu et al., 2020; Myers et al., 2017; National Register of Health Service Psychologists, 2020), we have compiled several evidence-based and practice-informed strategies to enhance tMBC feasibility and accessibility with specific recommendations for measures and COVID-19. Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Summary of Evidence-Based and Practice-Informed Recommendations for Telemental Health Measurement-Based Care (tMBC)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
provides a summary of tMBC strategies. In addition, online supplemental materials including clinician guides, client handouts, and a brief case example video are freely available at https://www.mirah.com/covid-19.
Integrating tMBC into TMH Workflow
Introducing tMBC to clients
Over the years, we have learned that clinicians who are high users of MBC often introduce it to clients as standard part of care and a vital tool that helps them do their jobs. They stress the communication aspects of MBC and set dual expectations for the client’s role (to complete the measures on the agreed-upon schedule), as well as their own role (they will review the resulting feedback and address in sessions as needed). For TMH, tMBC may also have a key role as part of backup plans for communication if there are technical difficulties that interfere with or prevent a session so that the client can still be supported (Lopez, Schwenk, Schneck, Griffin, & Mishkind, 2019). Moreover, tMBC affords opportunities for asynchronous, between-session communication that can inform session preparations and expectations for both parties.
Sending links by text message (SMS) or e-mail for clients to complete measures
MBC approaches vary broadly in how measures are administered and scored, how results are presented to clinicians, and so forth. For purposes of tMBC, we recommend web-based platforms that at minimum, allow for sending links by text message or e-mail for clients. By clicking on the link, the client will be able to enter their responses within a HIPAA-compliant and encrypted secure platform. Not only does this ensure confidentiality of data per TMH practice guidelines, but it also supports feasibility. Numerous digital MBC platforms exist (Lyon, Lewis, Boyd, Hendrix, & Liu, 2016), and many of them have this functionality, including Better Outcomes Now (https://betteroutcomesnow.com/), Mirah (https://www.mirah.com/), OQ Analyst (https://www.oqmeasures.com/), and Owl Insights (https://www.owlinsights.com/). Other technology features to look for are integration with electronic health records and/or telemental health platforms, automated scheduling of measures, and the ability to tailor measures to treatments, populations, or contexts of interest. It should be noted that web-based MBC platforms can function on any operating system where an Internet browser can be used, so there is no need for special equipment.
Setting up your screen(s)
Computer-assisted assessment has always been one of the more difficult aspects to implement within traditional in-person mental health practice, with concerns related to the impact of the technology on the relationship and practical issues, such as keeping track of tablets used for measure completion or placement of a screen within the physical setting of treatment (e.g., Patel, Vichich, Lang, Lin, & Zheng, 2017). In TMH, the ecological validity of the technology-enabled interaction would likely serve to improve the integration of tMBC as an active part of the treatment encounter, which may improve implementation and outcomes (e.g., Bickman et al., 2016). As shown in Figure 1,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Example of a screen view of multiple windows for telemental health measurement-based care (tMBC). For this example, we placed the MBC feedback report in a window to the right. On the left is the window containing the image of the client (not a real client). Below the client’s image is a space for notes. The technology that was used for this screenshot was a laptop with a 12-in. screen; a text-based notes application; Zoom videoconferencing software that has an option for HIPAA-compliant telehealth (https://zoom.us/docs/doc/Zoom%20for%20Healthcare.pdf); and Mirah, an MBC platform (https://www.mirah.com). The author confirms consent on her son’s behalf to include his image within this publication.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
it is relatively simple to “size” multiple windows so the clinician can open the most recent MBC feedback report alongside the video of the client. Having multiple monitors makes this even more feasible. In addition, having a third window open to take notes in session rather than hand-writing supports continuous attention to the screen, which may promote better eye contact and comfort for the clinician. However, other clinicians may be more comfortable taking notes by hand as they would do during an in-person session, and clinicians should prioritize setting up their system in a way that feels most natural to them.
Sharing feedback with clients
A core component of MBC’s impact on outcomes is the active use of feedback to inform care. Clinicians should strive to share feedback in sessions, by asking questions about results that were unexpected or addressing treatment gains or lack thereof. The sharing of feedback with clients reinforces their measure completion, but is also considered a mechanism of action for MBC. In traditional in-person settings, we often hear clinicians talk about “turning their screens around,” so both the client and clinician can view aspects of the MBC feedback together. We recommend the same for tMBC, where the clinician would “share” the MBC window using the selected technology, with two caveats. First, the clinician should ensure competency with the TMH technology and practice how to share a selected window but not the whole screen so unintended information is not seen. Second, we advise clinicians that deciding how and what to share from the feedback is a clinical judgment based on their knowledge of the client and the clinical issues at hand. Clinicians may choose to share all or a portion of the screen or simply discuss the feedback in conversation.
Billing and reimbursement for MBC
An important consideration to increase feasibility of tMBC is billing for remote care. Passed in March, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act (HR 748) provided funding for broadband services, expanded Medicare coverage, and created new allowances for telehealth at federally qualified health centers (FQHCs) and rural health clinics (RHCs). The CARES Act encouraged the use of remote patient monitoring for home health services, which is a core role for MBC in monitoring mental health symptoms. In January 2015, the mental health parity provisions of the Affordable Care Act made the American Medical Association’s CPT code 96,127 available for use to report administration of brief behavioral or emotional assessments, with scoring and documentation, using standardized instruments (American Medical Association, 2019).
tMBC Measures Considerations
The ideal measures for MBC are brief, sensitive to change, clinically actionable, and relevant to key stakeholders (e.g., clients, caregivers, etc.; Kelley & Bickman, 2009). The good news is that there are numerous free, brief symptom rating scales that are suitable for MBC (Becker-Haimes et al., 2020; Beidas et al., 2015). Rating scales offer a number of benefits, including the ability to compare client data to norms, and they are a central feature of most MBC systems. It can be useful, however, to also track individualized items tailored to the client’s goals or problems. These items, where clients identify problems and goals in their own words and rate them over time, may be more sensitive to change, and may also promote client engagement by focusing on topics most important to them (Jensen-Doss et al., 2018). Particularly under uncertain circumstances like the COVID-19 crisis, these items can provide flexibility around tracking unique challenges that may not traditionally appear in rating scales (e.g., stresses of remote working, social isolation, etc.).
Either rating scales or individualized items can also be used to monitor client risk, such as increased suicidality or child abuse. MBC involving such items of course raises ethical needs to monitor client responses, and some tMBC platforms have the ability to send alerts to clinicians when risk items are endorsed. Many tMBC systems also have algorithms to alert clinicians when clients’ symptoms are deteriorating, which can be extremely helpful in times of crisis.
MBC becomes more “actionable” if it also includes measures of therapy processes, and evidence suggests that a broader assessment battery can be used to turn care around when clients are not responding to treatment (Lambert, 2015). As a potential key mechanism of action for MBC, therapeutic alliance can be particularly useful to monitor. Within the context of telehealth, where it can be more difficult for the clinician to read nonverbal cues about the alliance, systematically measuring therapeutic alliance in tMBC presents clinicians with the opportunity to identify and address any alliance ruptures more quickly. Unique aspects of the TMH therapy process to measure include satisfaction with the technology, environment distractions, and so forth.
Finally, there are opportunities for novel applications of tMBC specific to the COVID-19 crisis. For example, all health care organizations have been recommended to screen for risk of possible virus transmission as part of all in-person visits (e.g., U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-criteria.html). If desired and possible with the tMBC platform, a COVID-19 screen for symptoms and exposure could be added to MBC protocols.
Conclusions

The field is witnessing a transition to TMH on a massive scale in response to the COVID-19 crisis, consistent with the suggestion that one of its most relevant applications is during or after a crisis when in-person interactions are not possible (Augusterfer, Mollica, & Lavelle, 2018). The “silver lining,” or opportunity to be found in this crisis, may be that the surge leads to greater acceptability and ongoing use of TMH after the global pandemic subsides. As an evidence-based and transtheoretical practice, tMBC promotes patient-centered communication and holds substantial promise to enhance treatment engagement and alliance when used to complement TMH. Clinical trials that have incorporated tMBC into TMH treatment have already shown initial success for this model of care, with some evidence that such services can at times even outperform traditional office-based care (Comer et al., 2017). The feedback resulting from systematic and ongoing assessment of client symptoms and therapy processes provides a strong foundation for improving clinician competency. The ability to visually share tMBC feedback between client and clinician provides an ecologically valid and creative strategy to optimize communication and cocreate shared understanding within the TMH context.",
"34": "1 | INTRODUCTION

In this issue, Connolly, Miller, Lindsay, and Bauer (2020) review the literature regarding the attitudes of mental health professionals providing telemental health services using videoconferencing (TMH-V) and factors affecting its use. The authors report the demonstrated benefits of TMH-V and identify some of the factors affecting its adoption by individual practitioners. A major finding was that practitioners with greater TMH-V experience had more positive attitudes about its use and were more likely to provide it. A recent literature review of barriers to the use of telebehavioral health (TBH; Cowan, McKean, McKean, Gentry, & Hilty, 2019) and other studies has also found clinician concerns about establishing rapport, privacy, safety, technology, reimbursement, and legal issues that hinder the adoption of TBH. Connolly et al. illustrate the need for identifying and responding to the many factors affecting the adoption of TBH practices by psychologists and other health professionals.
2 | WHAT ARE MAJOR TRENDS AFFECTING THE ADOPTION OF TELEBEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES?

Significant changes are occurring in the United States that foster continued growth of TBH services that will affect the future of TBH practices. The availability of telehealth and telemental health services continues to increase, with states passing laws requiring reimbursement and insurance plans expanding its availability (American Telemedicine Association, 2019), online businesses offering counseling/therapy via videoconferencing and texting, and professionals and organizations independently adding TBH to their repertoire of services. National health professional organizations have adopted ethical standards and guidelines providing guidance for telepractice (e.g., American Psychological Association, 2013; ATA, 2013; National Association of Social Workers, Association of Social Work Boards, Council on Social Work Education, & Clinical Social Work Association 2017). State licensing laws and rules for health professionals are increasingly and explicitly incorporating telepractice in the scope of practices that they regulate. Efforts to legally lower interjurisdictional practice barriers to interstate telehealth services are rapidly growing with states adopting interstate compacts (e.g., Interstate Medical Licensure Compact, Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact [PSYPACT], Interstate Nurse Licensure Compact). Nationally, health professionals working for the Departments of Defense and Veterans Affairs providing federally funded health-care services are granted interstate licensure reciprocity. Bipartisan congressional legislation to expand this type of national licensure reciprocity has been introduced for Medicare providers (O'Reilly, 2019). National conservative organizations such as the American Legislative Exchange Council and Institute for Justice continue to advocate for legislative deregulation of licensed professions that could potentially significantly impact the current health professions regulatory landscape and future telepractice.
3 | WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE OR COULD BE DONE TO PROMOTE THE ADOPTION AND VIABILITY OF TBH SERVICES?

3.1 | Practitioners and TBH training
Independently licensed behavioral health practitioners are adopting telepractice but often have not had formal education, training, and supervised experience in TBH (Gluekauf et al., 2018). Prior to offering TBH services, clinicians are advised to assess their TBH competencies and obtain adequate training, supervision, and consultation. Learning how to use technology in a professional context is only one of the number of competencies needed for TBH practice. Although all major mental health professions have ethical standards and/or guidelines that apply to TBH, practitioners need to be aware what knowledge, skills, and attitudes they need to have in order to be competent when providing TBH services. Using a recently published interprofessional TBH core competencies, framework (Maheu et al., 2018) to conduct a self-assessment is recommended as a start. The next step would be to find needed training in TBH competencies. Many TBH competencies are shared across health professions, and opportunities to learn from professionals in other disciplines ought to be considered. In addition to in-person workshops, presentations and formal classes related to TBH, online training resources are available, such as the Telebehavioral Health Institute, Zur Institute, and Person Centered Tech. Given the rapid rate of changes in technology and evolving TBH professional standards and guidelines, ongoing maintenance of TBH competencies through self-study (e.g., reading professional literature, attending workshops and presentations, consulting with peers) is important. Since many practitioners are not aware of what laws regulate telepractice (Gluekauf et al., 2018), it is imperative that they learn what state and federal laws and regulations they are required to comply with when providing TBH services.
3.2 | National professional organizations
National health professional organizational standards and guidelines provide some guidance in defining expectations of professionals when providing TBH services. These are often general in nature and efforts to apply them to specific circumstances, and specific technologies require careful consideration by practitioners. Greater guidance in how professionals apply ethical standards and guidelines to TBH practice using specific technologies need to be developed. Examples of more specific technology guidance are the social media guidelines developed by the Federation of State Medical Boards (Federation of State Medical Boards, 2012) and the Oregon State Board of Psychology (Oregon State Board of Psychology, 2018). Professional uses of technologies with clients will continue to present challenges to the application of traditional in-person standards. Professional organizations will need to take a leadership role in conjunction with regulatory boards to form a consensus about how this is done in order to provide greater clarity to practitioners.
A second important role that professional organizations could play in the future of TBH is in the area of accreditation standards for educational programs. Accreditation standards for educational programs for professions ought to include sufficient requirements that prepare new professionals for future practice. This includes basic technology skills and TBH competencies. Currently, health profession educational accreditation standards typically provide minimal emphasis on preparing professionals for TBH practice. As health professions review and revise their educational accreditation standards, they need to consider and make explicit to what extent they expect educational and training programs to include technology and TBH competencies.
3.3 | Regulatory boards and licensing laws
State regulatory or licensing boards are charged with implementing the laws and rules that regulate licensed professions for the protection of the public. Each state or jurisdiction has its own separate licensing laws and regulations that sometimes result in different licensure requirements and create barriers for licensure reciprocity if licensees move to another state. State licensing boards and their licensees would benefit from greater consistency in their laws and regulations affecting telehealth practices. This includes how telepractice is defined and regulated in order to facilitate interjurisdictional practice and make services more accessible to clients. Licensing boards need to consider the benefits of adopting consistent telepractice regulations and joining interstate compacts. An example is the recently activated PSYPACT, an interjurisdictional psychology compact that will allow psychologists in compact states to provide telepsychology services in other compact states through a one-time registration, rather than a state-by-state licensure process. This may require advocacy by professional organizations as well as educating licensing board members about TBH, the need for TBH regulations, and for interstate compacts. Just as important will be educating legislators about the importance of the regulation of licensed professions for the protection of the public.
3.4 | Health insurance coverage and payment
Although state and federal insurance laws and regulations continue to progressively encourage the provision of TBH services, telehealth often is being restricted in payment and coverage parity and laws mandating them not fully implemented by private insurance companies. Too often, professional TBH services are arbitrarily not being covered by health insurance or, if paid, not at rates comparable to in-person services. Progressive legislative and polices at both state and national levels are needed for greater inclusion and reimbursement of TBH services and to recognize it as a valuable form of health care.
3.5 | Graduate health profession programs
Graduate health profession programs have latitude in how to comply with educational accreditation standards when it comes to teaching students about professional uses of technology. In many graduate programs, this results in students graduating with little or no exposure to professional uses of technology or TBH. Telehealth and TBH will be a larger part of future health-care services, and new professionals need to obtain basic education and training in the use of technology and TBH. It therefore ought to be included in graduate program curriculums and clinical experiences. This may necessitate some programs starting with faculty development efforts so that faculty are prepared to teach in those areas. Recognizing and actively developing opportunities for some interprofessional TBH education and training experiences would benefit future interprofessional working relationships.",
"35": "Exposure to potentially traumatic events (e.g., physical abuse, sexual abuse, witnessing domestic or community violence, violent or unexpected death of a loved one) is a significant public health concern with approximately half of all youth reporting experiencing at least one type of potentially traumatic event before the age of 18 (Finkelhor, Turner, Shattuck, & Hamby, 2013; Kilpatrick et al., 2003). Trauma exposure increases the risk of a number of mental health problems and disorders including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety disorders, externalizing problems, and substance use disorders (Kessler, 2000). Despite high rates of trauma exposure and subsequent mental health outcomes, many children in need of mental health care still do not receive it, receive an inadequate “dose” of sessions, or do not receive evidence-based care (Alegría, Vallas, & Pumariega, 2010; Comer & Barlow, 2014). Even greater health disparities are seen across geographies (e.g., rural locations) and among racial and ethnic minority youth (Merikangas et al., 2011; “New Freedom Commission,” 2007).
Telepsychotherapy Can Extend the Reach of Evidence-Based Treatment

Telepsychotherapy (also referred to as telemental health or telehealth), offers an innovative way to address significant gaps in access to care. Telepsychotherapy refers to the use of interactive, real-time (synchronous) technologies, such as videoconferencing, to deliver psychotherapy to patients (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2019). Secure videoconferencing technology allows providers and youth/families at different locations to interact in real time. It is a relatively low-cost technology solution because mental health interventions largely rely on conversation rather than the need for the expensive peripheral devices (e.g., electronic otoscope or stethoscope) that are used in some telemedicine applications. Additionally, youth often have extensive exposure to and comfort with technology, including videoconference software, and thus, telepsychotherapy may be a particularly good fit for this age group (Nelson, Cain, & Sharp, 2017).
Telepsychotherapy has the potential to address several barriers in the accessibility of evidence-based care. First, telepsychotherapy can overcome distance and time barriers to treatment and minimize conflicts with job and child care responsibilities (Comer, Elkins, Chan, & Jones, 2014). For example, telepsychotherapy reduces travel time and thus can decrease interference with caregiver work schedules and missed school time for patients. In addition to the distance and time barriers, patients and families also report that they utilize telepsychotherapy to decrease costs associated with traveling long distances for care and to decrease stigma by connecting to child friendly locations such as schools (Gloff, LeNoue, Novins, & Myers, 2015).
Current evidence provides some support that services delivered via telehealth are efficacious in addressing a number of disorders in youth such as attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Myers, Vander Stoep, Zhou, McCarty, & Katon, 2015), obsessive–compulsive disorder (Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017), disruptive and oppositional behavior (Comer et al., 2015), depression (Nelson, Barnard, & Cain, 2003), PTSD (Stewart, Orengo-Aguayo, Cohen, Mannarino, & de Arellano, 2017), and other mental health problems (see Gloff et al., 2015, for a review). Comprehensive reviews of child telehealth have found good clinical outcomes in both rural and urban settings (e.g., Cain, Nelson, & Myers, 2015; Gloff et al., 2015; Nelson & Sharp, 2016), with high rates of diagnostic accuracy, practical feasibility of methods employed, and satisfaction across patients and caregivers (Hilty et al., 2016; Myers, Palmer, & Geyer, 2011).
Delivery of Trauma-Focused Treatment for Children and Adolescents via Telepsychotherapy

Although the published literature supporting telepsychotherapy delivery of evidence-based treatments for children is expanding, there is still a dearth of literature evaluating trauma-focused treatment for children delivered via telepsychotherapy. To our knowledge, there is only one small proof of concept feasibility study (Stewart, Orengo-Aguayo, Cohen, et al., 2017) and several case studies demonstrating feasibility and preliminary evidence of symptom reduction (Jones et al., 2014; Stewart, Orengo-Aguayo, Wallace, Metzger, & Rheingold, 2019; Stewart, Orengo-Aguayo, Gilmore, & de Arellano, 2017). Additional community-based studies are needed to establish feasibility and effectiveness of a telepsychotherapy service delivery model for childhood posttraumatic stress treatment in real world environments. This has become even more salient in the midst of the COVID-19 global pandemic of 2020, which has forced mental health providers (and many other health care professions) to transition to a telehealth service delivery modality in the interest of public safety.
Trauma-focused cognitive–behavioral therapy (TF-CBT; Cohen, Mannarino, & Deblinger, 2017) is an evidence-based treatment for trauma-exposed youth that has garnered robust empirical support. Over 21 randomized trials have demonstrated support for its efficacy in improving PTSD symptoms across a variety of service settings in both the United States and globally (Cohen et al., 2017, pp. 74–80; de Arellano et al., 2014). TF-CBT is ideal for disseminating and testing via a telehealth model of delivery as a means to reduce barriers in access to evidence-based, trauma-focused treatment.
Present Study

In 2015, our team developed the Telehealth Outreach Program (TOP) to deliver evidence-based, trauma-focused care to children and adolescents living in seven diverse communities across South Carolina. This effort involved ongoing program evaluation data regarding TF-CBT delivered to children via telepsychotherapy sessions conducted at either their schools or homes. This included measurement of practical feasibility variables (reflected in the number of sessions attended and rates of treatment completion), as well as pre–post comparison of clinically relevant treatment outcome variables (captured via standardized, psychometrically sound self-reports and structured clinical interviews). The methods for data extraction and aggregation entailed closed chart review of patients who received services through the TOP clinic (which received institutional review board approval). This article complies with the American Psychological Association’s (2020) Journal Article Reporting Standards.
Method

Participants and Context
Participants were 70 children and adolescents aged 7 to 18 who were referred to a major medical center in South Carolina. The sample had a mean age of 12.73 years (SD = 3.34) with the following demographic distribution: 81.4% female, 58.6% Hispanic, 30.0% African American, and 11.4% Caucasian. A total of 42.9% of youth had an index trauma of either sexual (n = 24) or physical (n = 6) abuse; 21.4% (n = 15) experienced the traumatic loss of a loved one; 18.6% (n = 13) witnessed domestic or community violence; 8.6% (n = 6) experienced or witnessed armed robbery; and 8.6% (n = 6) had other index traumas such as traumatic medical procedures, car accidents, and so forth. Fifty-six percent of youth also endorsed experiencing additional secondary traumas. All children met criteria for PTSD (n = 60), adjustment disorder (n = 9), or other specified trauma and stressor related disorder (n = 1) according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed; DSM–5; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) at the time of treatment initiation, assessed via a structured clinical interview and self-report assessments at intake. Patient barriers to traditional treatment access included lack of transportation, child caregiver work schedule, lack of childcare, residence in a rural area with limited access to treatment providers, and/or need for services to be conducted in Spanish. With regard to the latter, 34.3% of children (n = 24) and 57.1% of parents (n = 40) requested Spanish-language materials and services.
To overcome these barriers, patients received remote services either at school or home, in Spanish or English, as part of an ongoing telehealth program development project. TOP was initially funded as a pilot project in 2015 through a Duke Endowment Grant and subsequently funded through the South Carolina Telehealth Alliance and a Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration National Child Traumatic Stress Network grant. The program currently provides trauma-focused treatment for youth in seven underserved communities across South Carolina. The program receives referrals from schools, child advocacy centers, law enforcement agencies, mental health clinics, and other community agencies and provides assessment, TF-CBT treatment, and psychiatric medication management services as needed.
Broader inclusionary criteria for the current study were as follows: (a) patient age between 7 and 18 years; (b) at least one remembered/reported trauma on the University of California at Los Angeles PTSD Reaction Index (UCLA-PTSD-RI; Kaplow et al., 2020; Steinberg, Brymer, Decker, & Pynoos, 2004); (c) significant experience of posttraumatic stress, defined by self-report of at least three current symptoms of PTSD according to DSM–5 criteria; (d) presence of a caregiver who could participate in treatment as needed; (e) experience of at least one barrier to accessing traditional office-based treatment (e.g., rural location, caregiver work schedule, limited English proficiency); and (f) caregiver consent and child assent. Exclusionary criteria were (a) current significant suicidal ideation, (b) serious child externalizing behaviors that would endanger themselves or the telehealth equipment, or (c) under the age of 7. To expand on the latter, the therapist needed be able to view the child at all times via the web camera for safety reasons and children had to have attentional capacity sufficient to engage in a continuous 60 min of web-based interaction within this constraint. The research team colloquially found both of these criteria to be difficult with children younger than 7 (thus the rationale for a minimum age that was somewhat older than previous randomized TF-CBT trials that included much younger children).
Measures
UCLA-PTSD-RI (Kaplow et al., 2020; Steinberg et al., 2004)
The UCLA-PTSD-RI assesses trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress symptoms corresponding to DSM criteria in youth between the ages of 7 and 18. Parent-, child-, and adolescent-report versions of the instrument are available, all of which comprise 17 items capturing respondent experience of PTSD symptoms. The instrument yields a total scale score, as well as subscale scores for reexperiencing, avoidance, and hyperarousal. Total scores range from 0 to 68, with higher scores representing more severe posttraumatic symptoms. The instrument has demonstrated good internal reliability in multiple studies, with Cronbach’s alphas between 0.90 and 0.96 (Kaplow et al., 2020; Roussos et al., 2005; Steinberg et al., 2013). Cutoff scores of 38 (DSM–IV version; Steinberg et al., 2004) and 35 (DSM–5; Kaplow et al., 2020) have been previously established as reflective of a likely diagnosis of PTSD. The instrument can be administered as either a self-report or clinician interview, the latter of which was the format used with youth and caregivers in the current study.
Two additional notes about the use of the instrument in the current study are warranted. First, it was administered in Spanish to anyone (children or caregivers) whose stated preference was to communicate in that language. This translated version of the instrument is as yet unpublished but was obtained from the original author through a personal communication (Steinberg, May 9, 2017). As outlined in this communication, an extensive translation process was conducted that included forward translation from English to Spanish followed by back-translation and item-level refinement of any notable discrepancies. Second, two versions of the instrument were used, which corresponded to DSM–IV criteria for the first 50 patients and DSM–5 criteria for the last 20. Although the content changes between versions were minimal, scores on different versions of the measure were not directly comparable and adjustments to data analysis and presentation had to be made (see below).
Short Mood Feeling Questionnaire (SMFQ; Angold et al., 1995)
The SMFQ is a 13-item instrument to measure child and adolescent depression, comprising the 13 highest-loading items from the Mood Feeling Questionnaire–Long Form (Angold et al., 1995; Costello & Angold, 1988). Previous psychometric studies have exhibited good internal consistency of the measure (α = .85; Angold et al., 1995). Parent- and child-report versions of the instrument are available, and a score of 8 or higher on either form is indicative of likely depression. The original author was contacted to inquire about a Spanish translation of the instrument, which was reportedly developed across multiple organizations using a process very similar to that described above. As with the UCLA-PTSD-RI, the Spanish-language version of the instrument was administered to anyone with a stated preference for such (children or their parents).
Treatment
Trauma-focused cognitive–behavioral therapy
TF-CBT (Cohen et al., 2017) is an evidence-based, manualized treatment protocol used to treat posttraumatic stress symptoms in children and adolescents ages 3–18. TF-CBT is usually delivered in 12–24 weekly sessions and includes the following components: (a) psychoeducation, (b) parenting skills, (c) relaxation skills, (d) affective modulation skills, (e) cognitive processing skills, (f) trauma narration and processing, (g) in vivo mastery of trauma reminders, (h) conjoint child–parent sessions, and (i) enhancing safety or future development. Efficacy for TF-CBT has been established through numerous randomized controlled trials in a range of populations (Cohen et al., 2017).
Treatment was provided by one of the following: (a) a licensed clinical psychologist (the first author), (b) a postdoctoral fellow with a doctoral degree in clinical psychology, (c) a clinical psychology intern with a master’s degree in clinical psychology, or (d) a licensed master’s-level social worker. Both doctoral-level therapists and three of six interns were bilingual in English and Spanish and capable of conducting services in either language. All study personnel received initial TF-CBT training from a licensed clinical psychologist who is a national trainer in TF-CBT, as well as weekly clinical supervision from a licensed clinical psychologist with expertise in TF-CBT.
Telepsychotherapy connections
The clinical program examined was developed and refined according to the American Telemedicine Association’s and American Psychological Association’s current practice guidelines for telemental health, as well as published accounts of other technological, ethical, and administrative considerations (e.g., American Psychological Association, 2013; Myers et al., 2017; Shore et al., 2018). The hardware demands for rendering services were minimal, consisting on the therapist side of a desktop computer, web-camera, external speakers or a headset, and a microphone. For participants, hardware setups differed depending upon location, but requirements were similarly minimal. Participants receiving sessions at school connected using a laptop computer and headset device provided by the research team. Those receiving sessions at home had an array of connection options that depended upon their existing resources. When and where families had computers and access to sufficiently high-speed Internet, they could participate in home-based sessions using their own equipment. When families did not have access, however, the program provided them with an iPad (with the capability for cellular data transmission if needed), headset, and white noise machine for use to facilitate treatment. Software was selected to be similarly minimal in terms of learning demands and resources necessary to connect to treatment providers. Although many options for video communication are available, the current project entailed use of Vidyo (Vidyo Inc., 2010). Vidyo is videoconferencing software that conforms to Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act and Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health requirements and allows two-way, real-time communication in a low bandwidth environment. It also enables the capability for screen-sharing, which facilitates immediate display of handouts or other written materials with patients (Comer et al., 2014).
Procedure
Assessment
Participants referred for treatment initially engaged in a comprehensive clinical evaluation that included separate clinical interviews with child and caregiver(s), elicitation of trauma, medical, and psychiatric history, and completion of self-report instruments described above. These assessments were conducted either through telehealth or in-person meetings depending upon patient needs and logistical considerations for study-staff deployment. Preference for location of subsequent telepsychotherapy services was also discerned at this meeting, and eligible youths were scheduled to participate either at school or home. Self-report measures were repeated before beginning the trauma narration and processing component of treatment, which was an individually based and variably timed determination based on all available clinical data. The same clinical interview administered at baseline was repeated at the end of treatment, as were all self-reports. Participants did not receive compensation to complete assessments.
Treatment
Prior to the first treatment session all participants (and their schools, when relevant) received assistance from staff in setting up the Vidyo software and testing their connections. This test entailed technical assessment of bandwidth and user interface viability as well as a tutorial from the study staff about Vidyo’s basic functions. Additionally, schools and/or families were given basic guidelines for the physical environment in which treatment should ideally occur, including selection of an isolated, quiet space that would ensure privacy, deactivation of cell phones or other alerts from electronic devices, and minimization of other distraction opportunities (e.g., other people; TV; using the computer/iPad for other purposes during sessions). Once treatment parameters were established, participants presented for approximately weekly telepsychotherapy TF-CBT sessions with academic medical center therapists (located between 30 and 150 miles away). Special considerations for the format of treatment included ensuring that all individuals present announced themselves, backup plans were made to conduct sessions by phone in the event of an Internet outage or technical malfunction, and specific procedures to handle potential safety issues remotely (adult present and available at all times in case of an emergency; 911 or police called if child was in imminent risk and could not be deescalated or kept safe).
Patient and caregiver engagement
Caregiver participation is an important component of TF-CBT, but also a simultaneously challenging issue in child mental health treatment in terms of effectively engaging caregivers, particularly in a school-based environment. (Gopalan et al., 2010). Our program utilized evidence-based strategies to enhance engagement through addressing logistical, perceptual, and cultural barriers to treatment engagement (Gopalan et al., 2010; McKay & Bannon, 2004). These strategies involved using reminder phone calls and text messages, directly addressing caregiver concerns and barriers at the time of the initial appointment and throughout treatment, and addressing beliefs and attitudes related to mental health treatment (particularly those likely to present barriers to receiving services).
For the present study, 81% of youth (n = 57) had a caregiver who actively participated in treatment on a regular basis (i.e., attended treatment sessions weekly or biweekly). During each session, the therapist typically met individually with the child and then met conjointly with the child and caregiver or individually with child and caregiver at separate times for caregivers who were unable to attend sessions at their child’s school. For home-based telepsychotherapy cases (n = 24), the therapist was able to meet with the caregiver in the home via telehealth at the time of the session with the youth. For school-based telepsychotherapy cases (n = 46), caregivers could be scheduled to meet with the therapist at the school location. Alternatively, if the caregiver was unable to attend telepsychotherapy sessions at the child’s school, the child was seen at school via telepsychotherapy and the parent component was completed via computer or iPad at some other point (e.g., after the parent returned home from work or during the parent’s lunch break).
Interactive electronic-format activities for delivering treatment content and promoting engagement
TF-CBT is structured to make significant use of worksheets and visual aids to facilitate therapy being more interactive and engaging for children and adolescents. To implement these same strategies via telepsychotherapy a variety of techniques were implemented, including the development of electronic versions or treatment worksheets and handouts and the use of PowerPoint presentations and digital games. For example, worksheets and handouts designed for in-person therapeutic engagement were adapted to allow the therapist to use the “screen-share” function of the videoconferencing platform that allows real-time sharing of the therapist’s desktop view. We also created a series of interactive computer games that children play in session with their therapist to enhance the child’s understanding of treatment concepts. These programs allow both the therapist and patient to simultaneously see a working document in real-time during session; however, only the therapist was able to manipulate the documents and thus the child had to instruct the therapist which moves to make for him/her during the game. We used Microsoft PowerPoint, Word, and Excel and Adobe Acrobat to create our working documents and interactive games, thus making them portable and freely accessible to most environments (given the ubiquity of these software applications in professional settings).
The majority of activities and games used in our telepsychotherapy program were adaptations of in-person clinic-based TF-CBT treatment activities, but others were new games created specifically for the purpose of telepsychotherapy sessions. One activity adapted from in-person TF-CBT treatment activities is the “How Do We Experience Feelings in Our Bodies?” activity (Hendricks, Cohen, Mannarino, & Deblinger, n.d.), which aims to help children review physiological responses to emotions. In clinic-based, in-person care, the therapist uses a worksheet that asks the child to indicate where in his or her body he or she feels specific emotions and then collaborates with the child to color in the worksheet. For the telepsychotherapy delivery format, we developed an interactive PDF document that provides children with an image of the worksheet, which they can color in with the assistance of the therapist by continually verbally communicating to direct the therapist as to where to color.
An example of an interactive game we developed using PowerPoint (called “Feelings Memories”) reinforces emotion vocabulary in connection to real-life experiences. The child selects a tile numbered 1–12. Behind each numbered card are an emotion term and the instruction, “Tell me about a time when you felt (sad, mad, happy, scared, etc.).” The therapist and child take turns selecting a card and telling about a time when they felt the identified emotion. Other interactive games we developed are Jeopardy-style games presented via PowerPoint, which therapists use to review psychoeducation regarding sexual abuse, physical abuse, witnessing domestic violence, or traumatic grief, depending on the specific traumatic events each child had experienced.
Other examples of telepsychotherapy-specific strategies include the use of interactive worksheets, PowerPoint presentations with content tailored to the child’s interests, video clips, and electronic versions of children’s books. For example, we utilized PowerPoint to create an animated activity for teaching about varying levels of emotions. This animation shows a thermometer with the temperature rising as emotions intensify. Additionally, we frequently used video clips. For example, when teaching about diaphragmatic breathing with a child who liked soccer, we used a video clip of a soccer player utilizing diaphragmatic breathing before a penalty kick. We also incorporated additional strategies while completing the trauma narrative. For example, a child dictated the trauma narrative while the clinician typed verbatim what the child says into a Word document. The therapist was able to “share” the therapist’s screen with the child so that he or she could see the words that the therapist was typing in real-time. Additionally, children colored pictures with crayons and paper to illustrate specific elements of the traumatic event, which could be displayed to the camera and captured by the clinician through a screenshot (and later used in the child’s trauma narrative, if applicable). Similarly, therapists could also work collaboratively with the child to create a PowerPoint version of the trauma narrative incorporating clipart or other picture-based methods of conveying their experiences.
Results

Process Description and Qualitative Results: Feasibility
Strategies for providing TF-CBT via telepsychotherapy
A primary concern in delivering TF-CBT via telepsychotherapy was patient safety. To address this concern, pretreatment site visits to schools were used to survey the physical premises and build relationships that would later serve to facilitate good communication between the treating clinicians and the school staff (e.g., guidance counselor). During each session of TF-CBT, clinicians had contact information readily available for school staff. All appointments took place during regular school hours of operations; accordingly, the school staff was available in case of emergencies. Notably, there were only two instances in which school staff needed to be contacted, and no instances in which local authorities needed to be contacted due to patient safety concerns. In both instances schools were contacted due to patient suicidal ideation. Additionally, in school-based sessions there was one instance in which a teenager inappropriately disengaged from the therapeutic communication (i.e., closed the laptop during the therapy session), which was quickly reconnected with a call to the identified school contact (guidance counselor). There was also one instance of a patient leaving her chair and crouching on the floor out of view of the camera, wherein the clinician successfully requested that the patient return to the chair.
For home-based telepsychotherapy, a caregiver was always present in the home at the time of sessions. During each home-based session, clinicians had contact information available for the caregiver who was present in the home as well as additional emergency contacts for the child. Additionally, an emergency plan was discussed with each family that involved contacting local police or 911 if the clinician thought that the child or caregiver presented an imminent threat to themselves or others. No safety concerns arose during home-based TF-CBT telepsychotherapy sessions.
Technical performance of the telepsychotherapy equipment
There were few technical problems with the telepsychotherapy equipment. Occasionally, school sites and home-based patients experienced initial difficulty with logging into the videoconferencing software. This led to a delay in starting sessions; however, this issue was always easily resolved via telephone calls with the treating clinician. Additionally, the telepsychotherapy video feed occasionally became pixilated for several seconds when using a Wi-Fi-based Internet connection, but this was resolved by utilizing a direct Ethernet connection. More difficulty was encountered when utilizing cellular data-enabled iPads in rural locations. In several cases the video feed frequently became pixilated or froze and the sound and/or video were lost. These issues were often resolved by having the patient move to a different location with a better signal (provided that location was private). In one case the cellular data connection was too poor to adequately provide home-based treatment and thus the child was transitioned to school-based sessions. In general, though, the telepsychotherapy equipment worked adequately for its intended purpose and rarely necessitated accessing backup telephone procedures. The provision of simple, standardized troubleshooting guides and step-by-step, written reminders of instructions for accessing video connections likely also helped facilitate reduction of errors.
Quantitative Results
Initial comparison of groups
Demographics, baseline symptoms levels, and number of sessions completed were investigated across the two main treatment settings (school and patient home, excluding the two participants who received services in both). As expected, Mann–Whitney tests revealed no group differences in gender (p = .61), race (p = .88), or language preference (p = .78 and 0.53 for child and parent, respectively). Similarly, t tests comparing baseline measures revealed no differences in patient age (p = .55) or baseline symptom levels on the UCLA-PTSD-RI (p = .80 for child; p = .11 for parent) and SMFQ (p = .92 for child; p = .71 for parent) comparing school and home treatment settings. Additionally, neither group differed in terms of the number of sessions completed over the course of the study (p = .88). Given the lack of significant differences as a function of treatment setting, all analyses that follow were conducted considering the entire sample as a whole (see Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Outcome Scores
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
for summary data).
Service provision
School-based telepsychotherapy services were provided to 44 youth and home-based for another 24. Two additional youth began treatment in the school-based setting but later transitioned to home-based sessions after moving schools and no longer having availability of adequate resources at school. Assessment and treatment were provided in English or Spanish according to the stated preference of participants. Services were provided in English for 46 youth and Spanish for 24, whereas caregivers received Spanish-language sessions in 40 cases and English in 30.
Clinical outcomes
At baseline, 51.4% of children (n = 36) scored above the relevant clinical cutoff on the UCLA-PTSD-RI (accounting for the version of the scale implemented). By the completion of treatment, however, only 4.3% scored above clinical cutoffs (n = 3). A similar trend was noted in parent report on the UCLA-PTSD-RI, wherein 28.5% (n = 20) indicated clinical elevation at baseline but none did by the end of treatment. Examination of mean scores for both versions of the instrument are given at pre-, mid-, and posttreatment in Table 1. Comparisons of pre- and posttreatment child-reported scores indicated significant differences on both the DSM–IV, t(40) = 14.12; p < .0001; d = 2.42 and DSM–5 versions, t(17) = 8.90; p < .0001; d = 2.04. Findings comparing parent-reported data were similar, DSM–IV, t(36) = 9.19; p < .0001; d = 1.68; DSM–5, t(16) = 6.09; p < .0001; d = 1.50.
As can be seen in Table 1, baseline child and parent reports on the SMFQ indicated mean levels that were above the established clinical cutoff score. By the completion of treatment, however, these scores had decreased precipitously such that average symptom levels were no longer problematic. Comparing baseline to posttreatment scores for children, t(57) = 9.27; p < .0001; d = 1.24, and parents, t(51) = 6.34; p < .0001; d = 1.21, indicated that this difference was statistically significant in both cases. The aforementioned variables were also compared in a series of 2 (Group; school or home) × 2 (Time; pre- or posttreatment) analyses of variance. These results were nonsignificant (all values between 0.37 and 0.81), indicating that within-group changes were consistent regardless of the setting in which treatment occurred.
As outlined above, all participants met criteria at baseline for a trauma- or adjustment-related disorder, with 60 of 70 participants having a primary diagnosis of PTSD. By the end of treatment 54 participants (77.1%) were diagnosis-free and another seven (10.0%) retained primary diagnoses that were not related to trauma. Only two cases continued to meet criteria for PTSD by the endpoint assessment, and both evidenced substantial changes in self-reported posttraumatic symptoms on the UCLA-PTSD-RI (decrease from 72 to 42 for one participant and 46 to 26 for the other).
Discussion

The world is currently undergoing an unprecedented global pandemic with COVID-19 that has highlighted the pressing need for evidence-based telehealth service delivery models of mental health services. Stress is increased for many caregivers and children due to things such as social isolation and economic instability. There is the potential for increase in PTSD and other stress-related disorders in children, particularly children of caregivers at elevated risk for exposure, including health care providers, first responders, grocery store and sanitation workers, and so forth. The present open pilot trial of TF-CBT offers one of the first evaluations of the use of telepsychotherapy to remotely deliver TF-CBT in community-based locations, and findings supported the preliminary feasibility and effectiveness of this novel treatment delivery format with trauma-exposed children and adolescents. The present findings add to a growing body of literature supporting telepsychotherapy for expanding the reach of evidence-based mental health treatments for youth (e.g., Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017; Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017; Cooper-Vince, Chou, Furr, Puliafico, & Comer, 2016; Doss, Feinberg, Rothman, Roddy, & Comer, 2017; Gloff et al., 2015; Nelson et al., 2003; Sibley, Comer, & Gonzalez, 2017). Although recent research has supported the efficacy of telepsychotherapy delivery of a variety of interventions for children, the literature has focused very little on childhood PTSD. The preliminary feasibility and positive treatment outcome of telepsychotherapy-delivered TF-CBT observed in this pilot evaluation are promising. Close to nine out of every 10 youth (88.6%) completed a full course of telehealth delivered TF-CBT, and 96.8% of these treatment completers no longer met diagnostic criteria for a trauma-related disorder at posttreatment. Although 2.9% (or two individuals) did not exhibit full treatment response, both youths showed substantial treatment response in the form of symptom reduction (albeit not to the extent of full diagnostic remission). Although this pilot evaluation was, by design, underpowered and not methodologically geared to test formal efficacy (see Gallo, Comer, & Barlow, 2013; Kraemer, Mintz, Noda, Tinklenberg, & Yesavage, 2006), there was nonetheless preliminary indication that TF-CBT delivered via telepsychotherapy yielded a favorable clinical response from both youth and caregiver perspectives.
Although the present pilot study did not include a comparison condition in which youth were treated in a clinic-based setting, the findings are promising in showing treatment effects that are comparable with TF-CBT delivered in an in-person, office-based setting (Rubin, Washburn, & Schieszler, 2017). Considering that attrition from office-based TF-CBT treatment remains a significant concern (e.g., approximately 25–50%; Cohen, Mannarino, & Iyengar, 2011; Olfson et al., 2009; Scheeringa, Weems, Cohen, Amaya-Jackson, & Guthrie, 2011), the rate of 11.4% for the current study is encouraging. Reduction in barriers to accessing care that the use of telepsychotherapy technology affords (e.g., reduced need for caregivers to take time off from work; find transportation/gas money to reach our clinic; drive long distances to appointments), as well as the availability of linguistically competent clinicians, may have contributed to the high treatment completion rates and the concomitant reductions in clinical symptoms. In particular, it is important to note that our program also utilized additional engagement strategies (Gopalan et al., 2010; McKay & Bannon, 2004), such as using reminder phone calls and text messages, directly addressing caregiver concerns and barriers at the time of the initial appointment and throughout treatment, and addressing beliefs and attitudes related to mental health treatment. These engagement strategies may have decreased treatment attrition beyond what would be seen if we had used the telepsychotherapy delivery model without these additional engagement strategies. While the lack of treatment attrition in the present study is very encouraging, future controlled studies will be needed to directly compare attrition rates for the telepsychotherapy versus in-person treatment modalities.
Additionally, future studies investigating the sustainability of telepsychotherapy models are important to further development of this modality of treatment. This becomes an especially important aspect of future research given the global pandemic outbreak of COVID-19 and subsequent rapid adjustment to most mental health services now being offered through telepsychotherapy connections (whether or not providers, agencies, or service delivery systems were ready to do so). For example, individual states are increasingly mandating coverage for telepsychotherapy (American Telemedicine Association, 2017; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2019) and third-party payers are improving reimbursement for real-time telehealth services (American Medical Association, 2019; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2018; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2020b). The recent COVID-19 pandemic has also resulted in temporary federal mandates for Medicare to reimburse telepsychotherapy services offered by psychologists and other mental health providers without regard for previous restrictions regarding rural locations (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2020b). Additionally, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has temporarily relaxed Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act compliance regulations for virtual platform use in an effort to increase the reach of services during this global crisis (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, 2020). Psychiatric services (e.g., medication management) provided via telehealth were significantly more likely to be reimbursed prior to the COVID-19 pandemic than psychotherapies (e.g., TF-CBT) delivered via telehealth, particularly by federal and state programs (American Telemedicine Association, 2017; Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2020a), partially due to their greater ease of integration into primary care or other approved originating environments previously necessary to adhere to CMS rules. The steps taken to increase reimbursement for telepsychotherapy services during the current global pandemic may be the first step in paving the way for sustainability of these services in the future. Further work to establish the effectiveness of delivering trauma-focused treatment for youth through telepsychotherapy could promote sustainability of these interventions that can help to reduce the burden of suffering for families who are underserved by typical office-based models of care (Kazdin & Blasé, 2011).
The present pilot study provides preliminary evidence of the ability to successfully deliver TF-CBT via telepsychotherapy technology, resulting in clinically meaningful symptom change posttreatment with low treatment attrition (11.4% dropout) among trauma-exposed children and adolescents ages 7–18. Additionally, the ethnic and language diversity of the sample (58.6% Hispanic, 30.0% African American; 34.3% of children and 57.1% of parents requesting Spanish-language materials and services) provide important preliminary evidence of TF-CBT effectiveness with a more representative sample of trauma-exposed youth in the United States, which may have applicability to other global settings (e.g., Central and Latin America). Nevertheless, additional efforts are still needed to further establish the empirical base for telepsychotherapy delivery of trauma-focused treatment for youth.
Limitations of the present study include the small sample size and primarily female sample, which may reduce the generalizability of the study results. The lack of a comparison group and randomization are also problematic in terms predicting the applicability of results in other environments, which would suggest the need for noninferiority studies similar to those seen among adult veteran populations (e.g., Acierno et al., 2016). Treatment fidelity was also only informally assessed during weekly supervision, but more formal measures would have been useful. Additionally, TOP was potentially somewhat atypical in that the program was able to provide iPads and Internet access to patients who would otherwise not have been able to access these resources (thus precluding their participation in treatment). Cost-effectiveness analysis and careful attention to resource acquisition would be useful to examine the feasibility of this strategy in future work in usual care settings. Organizations will need to think creatively to address these barriers, such as obtaining grant or other funding to provide these resources for needy families, as some school districts are doing currently for schooling in the midst of national quarantine restrictions on school attendance.
Despite these limitations, program evaluation of applied service delivery environments are critical for pilot testing novel treatment formats that may be useful in supporting future randomized inquiries (Gallo et al., 2013; Kraemer et al., 2006). The present findings are among the first to provide evidence in support of the preliminary feasibility, acceptability, and effectiveness of telehealth TF-CBT for youth presenting with trauma-related disorders (i.e., PTSD, adjustment disorder, other specified trauma and stressor related disorder). The COVID-19 global pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented need to rethink how mental health services are delivered, which is particularly applicable to high base rate conditions related to posttraumatic stress. In an effort to protect the public, thousands of mental health providers and patients have been advised to transition to a telepsychotherapy delivery format. Telepsychotherapy offers many benefits over traditional face-to-face psychotherapy service delivery models including (a) reduction of barriers in access to care (e.g., distance to clinic, lack of transportation, cost of gas and parking, work schedules, childcare), (b) increased likelihood of adequate treatment dose and completion (by way of reducing the aforementioned barriers), and, more recently, (c) protecting the public amid a global crisis that requires physical distancing and potentially relative social isolation. Having started this clinic five years ago, our team was well suited to assist teams across the United States and the world in transitioning their own services to a telepsychotherapy format, which was fortuitous as the need to do so arose for essentially the entire field at once. We have now trained providers across child advocacy centers, academic medical centers, university clinics, and independent practice environments. Given the existing network of nationally certified TF-CBT therapists (https://tfcbt.org), and many international TF-CBT therapists, these findings suggest the potential for providing effective and accessible telepsychotherapy intervention during this public health crisis (as well as those that will occur in the future). It will be imperative to present empirical evidence for the feasibility and potential effectiveness of delivering psychotherapy for children and adolescents via telepsychotherapy to legislators and policymakers to ensure sustained reimbursement and expansion of this method. If the COVID-19 pandemic has taught us anything about health care service delivery thus far, it is that the entire American system was ill prepared to adapt to such a crisis. Future work to develop new clinical and technical infrastructures, public policies, and methods of reimbursement is imperative to ensuring that this crisis results in an opportunity to improve service delivery to those in need.",
"36": "Telemental health (TMH) refers to the use of information and technology to provide mental health services when providers and patients are separated geographically (Sood et al., 2007). TMH services span diagnostic assessment; individual, group, couples, and family therapy; neuropsychological testing; medication management; patient and provider education and collaboration. Services can be delivered through both asynchronous means (e.g., e-mail, chat rooms, remote monitoring device) or synchronous clinical video telehealth. Given its comprehensive nature, one of the major goals of TMH is to reduce disparities in access to high-quality, evidence-based, mental health care, making TMH particularly well-suited to address the dearth of specialized mental health resources in rural areas (Grady et al., 2011; Monnier, Knapp, & Frueh, 2003; Norman, 2006).
TMH in Veteran’s Health Administration

There is an increasing demand to address Veterans’ mental health needs, and the current body of literature highlights the mismatch between the proportion of Veterans residing in rural areas and qualified mental health providers who are available to provide services (United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Workforce, 2014; United States Department of Veteran Affairs (VA), Office of Rural Health, 2015). Consequently, the provision of TMH services has become a key focus of the Veteran’s Health Administration’s (VHA) efforts. Increasing evidence suggests that Veterans can be treated for a wide range of diagnoses via TMH, with efficacy and satisfaction comparable to that of in-person treatment, for individual and group therapy, as well as neuropsychological testing (Bouchard et al., 2004; Cullum, Hynan, Grosch, Parikh, & Weiner, 2014; Cullum, Weiner, Gehrmann, & Hynan, 2006; Gehrman, Shah, Miles, Kuna, & Godleski, 2016; Gros, Yoder, Tuerk, Lozano, & Acierno, 2011; Hilty et al., 2013; Morland et al., 2014; Morland, Hynes, Mackintosh, Resick, & Chard, 2011).
The VHA TMH Hub initiative was developed in 2002, with the aim of using technology-facilitated care, to provide patient-centered, expedient mental health services from a facility “hub” to “spoke” site facilities (e.g., VHA medical centers, VHA community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs), residential treatment centers, student health centers and Veterans’ homes; Godleski, 2014). TMH interventions are delivered in VHA through secure, real-time, interactive clinical videoconferencing systems, which provide high definition, two-way communication between providers and Veterans. In 2017, VA’s TMH Hubs contributed to more than 151,600 Veterans receiving TMH services delivered at CBOCs and 8,700 Veterans receiving mental health services in their homes or other non-VA locations, highlighting the accessibility and flexibility of the treatment modality (United States Department of VA, Office of Connected Care, 2018).
VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology Service

The VA NY Harbor Health Care System (VA NYH) was selected to serve as a Hub in 2016 as part of an expansion of the original Hub initiative. Since its inception, the VA NYH TMH Hub has successfully delivered a wide range of mental health services to VA medical centers, CBOCs, domiciliary and residential posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) programs, and to numerous Veterans’ homes. This hub-and-spoke model was designed to expand offerings for specialized mental health resources to rural areas and provide support to rural clinicians, rather than permanently replace local resources. The services offered through psychiatry include medication management and emergency room coverage. Psychology services include individual, couples, and group psychotherapies; neuropsychological and psychodiagnostic assessment; and other specialized psychological evaluations (e.g., PTSD assessments). Individual and couples’ therapy are provided to VA medical centers, CBOCs and Veterans’ homes; group therapy is provided to VA domiciliary and PTSD residential programs and neuropsychological and psychodiagnostic assessments are provided to VA medical centers and CBOCs. The VA NYH TMH Hub uses a “network model,” whereby all TMH psychologists are available to deliver services to any spoke site or to Veterans’ homes in the spoke site catchment areas. Additional details about the specific services provided and the structure of the VA NYH TMH Hub program’s psychology service are outlined in Chen and colleagues’ (2019) paper.
TMH Implementation Challenges

As with any new treatment modality, the implementation of telehealth services has highlighted important challenges, namely systemic, technological, administrative, provider, and patient issues. In terms of infrastructure, systemic issues that have been noted include licensing and credentialing regulations regarding the provision of care across state lines, and questions related to reimbursement (Benavides-Vaello, Strode, & Sheeran, 2013; Castro, Miller, & Nager, 2014). Literature also suggests that technological issues, such as bandwidth limitations, audio and visual quality and administrative challenges, such as clinic space, staffing and support from leadership, may increase hesitancy to adopt the TMH modality, both in VA and non-VA settings (Brooks, Turvey, & Augusterfer, 2013).
A meta-analytic review of factors influencing adoption of TMH identified barriers to TMH implementation, include: providers’ concerns about increased administrative and documentation load, adequately addressing risk and safety issues from afar and provider reluctance to work with a new modality (Bee et al., 2008). In addition, obstacles to disseminating information and educating patients about TMH have been raised as potential challenges to implementation in large, private health care systems (Ellimoottil, An, Moyer, Sossong, & Hollander, 2018).
Nevertheless, evidence of factors facilitating TMH implementation include, increasing communication about treatment offerings to referring providers and identifying staff that support telehealth at each level of the organization. One study that evaluated telehealth implementation within four large U.S. health care systems noted the positive impact of encouraging clinicians to consider the ways that telehealth may improve delivery of care in a unique, rather than one-size-fits-all manner; this was achieved through appointing a telehealth coordinator to simplify logistical procedures and patient outreach and maintaining consistency in scheduling and documentation procedures (Ellimoottil et al., 2018). Another study evaluating use of TMH with female Veterans identified driving forces in the expansion of TMH to be (a) efforts to reduce stigma in receiving mental health services, particularly in small communities where maintaining anonymity is challenging; (b) opportunities to work with clinicians with specialized training; and (c) ease of receiving services in one’s home (Moreau et al., 2018).
As TMH services and technology advances, it is increasingly important to understand the unique barriers and facilitators in the implementation of TMH within VA. The present article examines factors that enhance and challenge the provision of psychotherapy via TMH, as experienced by TMH psychologists. Strategies are offered to improve telehealth processes, enhance effectiveness of mental health care for Veterans and support evolution, to flexibly meet the needs of Veterans and continually improve services, which benefits TMH clinical providers, technical staff, hospital leadership and administration.
Method

The information presented here was generated through discussion among nine psychologists working in the TMH Hub, during weekly staff and peer supervision meetings, over the first two years of implementing TMH services. VA NYH TMH psychologists’ demographics include: 78% female, 89% Caucasian, and an average of 6 years of postdoctoral experience (SD = 3.61). Notes were taken during meetings regarding challenges encountered delivering individual, group, couples’ therapy and neuropsychological assessment via TMH and ways to enhance the development of the TMH program to meet these challenges. One psychologist (Erica Shreck) organized these notes into categories and specific barriers and facilitators were then discussed among the other eight psychologists to ensure that all relevant issues were addressed.
Results

Perceived barriers and facilitators to the implementation and development of a TMH hub, specifically the telepsychology service, are discussed across clinical, technical and administrative categories. Given the overlap between factors that support and challenge program implementation, barriers, and facilitators are discussed together within each category. Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Perceived Barriers and Facilitators Across Categories
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
provides a summary of the categories, with a brief description listed.
Clinical Issues
In terms of clinical issues, VA NYH TMH Hub psychologists identified three areas of discussion: the “network model” of organization, provision of clinical services and the impact of telehealth on the therapeutic relationship.
“Network model” considerations
VA NYH TMH Hub psychologists identified that delivering psychotherapy over telehealth may facilitate the clinical process in several ways. VA NYH TMH Hub’s use of the “network model” allows for Hub psychologists to offer numerous specialized mental health treatments to each spoke site, thus engaging Veterans in specialty treatment they may not otherwise have access to, as Hub psychologists offer over 20 different evidence-based treatments (Chen et al., 2019). However, given the short-term model of evidence-based treatments, connecting Veterans in need of additional services following telehealth treatment poses difficulties, due to the complexity of Veterans’ presenting issues and the lack of specialized clinical resources in spoke site areas. For example, because of expertise in dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), Hub psychologists have increasingly received referrals to treat Veterans at high risk for suicide and/or homicide, often in conjunction with medical and mental health comorbidities. Such Veterans frequently require additional treatment following stabilization of risk-related issues. As such, Hub psychologists grapple with how to ensure these Veterans continue to receive the ongoing supportive care they need to maintain therapeutic gains. In addition, working with multiple spoke sites connected to different hospital systems makes integration with multidisciplinary teams challenging. It can be difficult to coordinate care with other providers across sites, which impacts access to important information about Veterans that may be more readily available with on-site multidisciplinary communication.
Provision of clinical services
Telehealth treatment provides unique opportunities in clinical assessment and delivery of psychotherapy, as well as the ability to reduce wait times for initial appointments and improve overall access to quality mental health care. Video-to-home (V2H) provides the opportunity for Hub psychologists to engage with Veterans outside of the confines of VA facilities, which can be used to modify treatments to increase their effectiveness. For example, a cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia therapist can recommend changes to a Veteran’s sleep environment after observing their bedroom, and a cognitive behavioral therapy for depression therapist can use the order of a Veteran’s home to assess changes over time in a Veteran’s energy and motivation. Hub psychologists can design and implement interventions to be delivered within the most appropriate environment, such as having Veterans with obsessive-compulsive disorder engage in exposure exercises within or outside their own home. V2H may increase the possibility that the treatment intervention can be generalized beyond the therapy room if it takes place at the site where change is needed. Hub psychologists also recognized potential barriers in V2H, in terms of potentially reinforcing patterns of avoidance or maintaining isolation for Veterans who prefer not to leave their homes. Concerns regarding maintaining privacy with V2H visits are discussed at the outset of treatment through the verbal informed consent process, to mitigate issues that may arise due to having less control over the therapeutic space in one’s home (e.g., sessions should be conducted in a safe, confidential space and should be treated similarly to an in-person session).
Impact on therapeutic relationship
Hub psychologists noted that the therapeutic relationship is affected by various external factors, including limitations imposed by physical distance on the ability to create safety and comfort within the Veteran’s session space. For instance, the Hub psychologist has little control over the temperature of the room, noise level, or privacy. Hub psychologists noted examples of seeing Veterans in medical treatment rooms, in spaces where no tissues were available. This effect is magnified in TMH V2H, in which it is the veteran who has control over the therapeutic environment. More specifically, the Veteran may be seen in a location that is experienced as provocative or overstimulating (e.g., the bedroom) or one which is filled with distractions, which can negatively impact the Veteran’s capacity to focus or feel comfortable being fully vulnerable and open (e.g., in a car parked outside of their work). As such, the Hub psychologist may be a passive bystander to certain happenings without the ability to intervene, even to provide a Veteran with tissues or respond if a Veteran leaves the treatment room during the session.
Nevertheless, for Veterans seen V2H, the Veteran’s ability to exert control over the space in which therapy is conducted may increase comfort and facilitate openness. The VA facility itself may be triggering for Veterans, in terms of experiences of harassment for marginalized groups and previous memories of negative health care experiences. Thus, TMH offers an avenue to avoid unnecessary barriers to obtaining the treatment that Veterans need. There may be a sense that the power dynamic is diffused by seeing the Hub psychologist in an environment they have shaped, rather than a therapist’s office and may put Veterans who are reticent about engaging in therapy at ease by having it occur on their “turf.” The Hub psychologist may also be introduced to other important people and/or pets in the Veteran’s life which creates a richer sense of connection. For example, Hub psychologists have found that Veterans often have dogs or cats with them during V2H sessions, which helps with emotion regulation during discussion of difficult material. In addition, TMH treatment, especially when delivered via V2H, provides flexibility in terms of timing and location of sessions, facilitating treatment to Veterans who typically would have difficulty attending regular in-person sessions (e.g., those who work full-time and/or travel for work, have childcare needs, lack transportation, have medical conditions that make travel difficult, or who live far from a VA facility).
When Veterans are seen at local CBOCs, the therapeutic relationship is impacted by the addition of a third person, the telehealth clinical technician (TCT). The TCT, not the Hub psychologist, greets the Veteran in the waiting room, escorts them to the treatment room, assesses for the Veteran’s comfort, and assists with dial-up and transmission of homework assignments and handouts. The set-up impacts the amount of information available to the Hub psychologist (e.g., observations regarding where the Veteran is sitting in the waiting area, who they interact with and how, and mental status observations such as smelling alcohol or observing how someone is walking), as well as the Veteran’s observation and experience of the psychologist. It can also affect the Veteran’s transition into the therapeutic experience in ways that are beyond the clinician’s control. For instance, a Hub psychologist may be available at the session time but the TCT schedule calls for participation in additional responsibilities at that time. The role of the TCT in transmitting questionnaires and homework means that they are privy to personal information that is typically privileged between clinician and Veteran, which may increase feelings of distance and impact the Veteran’s openness in treatment. Nevertheless, clinical advantages in having TCT involvement include, knowledge of the culture of the community and the clinic/local VA, as well as ability to share clinical data via secure message prior to, during or after an appointment (e.g., TCT encouraging a Veteran to return to a couples’ session after leaving the room escalated).
Hub psychologists identified that the experience of physical distance is exacerbated by cultural differences that exist inherently, because the clinician and Veteran are in different locales, which may create challenges to the therapeutic relationship. The VA NYH TMH Hub is in New York City, with care provided to rural areas in upstate New York and Iowa. Cultural differences span a range of factors including socioeconomic status, racial/ethnic diversity, age, education/profession, family structure and political views. Awareness of certain cultural norms based on geography can represent a barrier to both clinician understanding and Veterans’ willingness to engage with the therapeutic process. For example, Hub psychologists noted the challenges of fully grasping agrarian life and the centrality of the needs of the farm, making it difficult to collaborate with Veterans around enhancing self-care. Challenges were also observed in brainstorming pleasurable activities in a behavioral activation protocol, due to reduced awareness of what is typical in the Veterans’ geographic region. Hub psychologists have observed that constant noise in the New York City area (e.g., frequent sirens that are often heard through the technology) may be a trigger during sessions for Veterans with anxiety and PTSD.
In addition, a cultural disconnect may exist between providers at the Hub and spoke sites. This may, in turn, impact referrals and the ability to coordinate care where spoke site providers hold the belief that Hub psychologists will be unable to fully understand the Veteran’s experience or perspective. When initiating TMH services, a spoke site referring provider expressed concern that Hub psychologists’ may not appreciate how overlapping/dual roles are common and unavoidable in small communities. Subsequently, this may affect Veterans’ willingness to engage in treatment, due to concerns about anonymity and confidentiality, as Veterans’ family members and friends may be employed in the health care field.
Somewhat paradoxically, the physical distance between the Veteran and clinician may also facilitate closeness within the therapeutic relationship. As Hub psychologists live far removed from the Veteran’s community, anonymity increases and may allow for greater openness on the part of the Veteran. Furthermore, Hub psychologists have observed increased feelings of safety discussing homicidal ideation and violent thoughts, given the physical distance.
Technical Issues
Technical barriers and facilitators are discussed in the areas of technological advancements and the presentation and transmission of materials in treatment.
Technological advancements
Telehealth technology serves as the foundational infrastructure and a key facilitator in the provision of clinical care to spoke site areas, by bolstering the quality of care and expanding the breadth of clinical services provided. In addition to individual and couples’ therapy, technology facilitates access to neuropsychological and psychodiagnostic assessment, as well as group therapy with Veterans and clinicians located at multiple sites. Camera capabilities, such as a document reader, make it feasible to administer complex neuropsychological measures by mirroring measures to the Hub psychologist’s screen, as Hub psychologists use Cisco DX80 devices (23-in. liquid crystal display monitors with a 1,920 × 1,080 resolution) to administer TMH treatment and neuropsychological and psychodiagnostic assessments; additional details regarding the specific technology used in the VA NYH TMH Hub are outlined in Chen and colleagues’ (2019) paper.
Multiway video capabilities set the stage for facilitating groups in different locations, maximizing access to care. Another identified technological facilitator is the opportunity to use different types of equipment (e.g., laptop, desktop, tablet, and smartphone), which improves ease of use for Veterans and continuity of care if the Veteran is traveling, as well increases clinicians’ flexibility to work remotely if they are unable to be at a VA facility. The technology also supports flexible application of exposure-based interventions (e.g., using one’s home environment for obsessive-compulsive disorder-related exposures) or in planning the hierarchically based transition from one’s home to clinic in treating symptoms of agoraphobia.
Although the rapid evolution of telehealth technology has been instrumental in facilitating spoke site access to expert clinical care, the technology also presents limitations to care delivery. Hub psychologists noted that disruption in the video and/or audio connection may lead to missing session content and/or reducing the capacity to glean information from nonverbal cues. Furthermore, technical disruptions may interrupt the flow of session and sense of safety created for a Veteran who is communicating particularly emotionally charged material (e.g., a Hub psychologist lost connection with a Veteran during recounting an imaginal exposure in a prolonged exposure session). In addition, because of the positioning of the camera, the Hub psychologist is generally only able to see the upper body of the Veteran, which reduces the ability to assess for lower body movement and issues with gait or mobility. One Hub psychologist was unaware that a Veteran ambulated with a walker, whereas another clinician did not realize that a Veteran had lost a significant amount of weight throughout the course of treatment, potentially impacting treatment recommendations in a behaviorally focused treatment. In couples’ therapy, this limited viewpoint can interfere with identifying moments when one partner reaches out for another. Nevertheless, Hub psychologists have observed increased attunement to the Veteran’s face at times, as it occupies a large portion of the screen (e.g., Hub psychologist inquiring about Veteran’s feelings of anxiety after clearly noticing beads of sweat forming on the Veteran’s brow).
Though these disruptions can vary in intensity and frequency based on the Veteran’s location, they occur in both clinic-based and at-home appointments, as well as across individual, couples and group therapy, with issues often most pronounced in a group setting. Group members can vary from nearly inaudible to extremely loud, which may be contingent on the level of ambient noise in the group room; side conversations during group are particularly disruptive. In terms of visual quality in the group setting, the varying distance of group members from the camera, combined with the relatively small size of the screen on the clinician’s side, often makes it difficult to identify the group member speaking or assess for nonverbal signs of communication.
Use of materials in treatment
When considering technical barriers and facilitators, Hub psychologists noted how the use of materials in treatment may be impacted by this modality. For instance, screen sharing facilitates the presentation of worksheets and reviewing data with the Veteran in real time. This enhances Hub psychologists’ ability to provide psychoeducation, improve engagement and flexibly adapt and meet the Veteran where he or she is in session (e.g., pacing the presentation of information to match the Veteran’s style). However, transferring measures and handouts outside of session can be difficult, particularly for Veterans seen at home. Though the VA has a secure electronic platform available to facilitate this transfer (MyHealtheVet), Hub psychologists experience frequent issues when relying on this medium, such as messages not being delivered, Veterans having difficulty accessing the system, and only a fraction of Veterans being registered to use this system. These barriers result in delays in receiving the data, transferring information, and increase the administrative burden on the Hub psychologist to rely on other methods (e.g., postal service or verbally administering measures). In addition, for telehealth clinic appointments, Hub psychologists rely on technical staff (TCTs) to transmit materials and the reliability and speed with which materials are received by Hub psychologists is significantly impacted by the staff member’s availability.
Administrative Issues
Lastly, administrative issues are discussed in the areas of overall logistical processes and the development of the Hub structure, the “network model” and integrating VA NYH TMH Hub’s missions.
Procedures and logistics
Since implementation of the VA NYH TMH Hub, a range of administrative barriers have been addressed to facilitate delivery of services offered through the Hub. When the Hub was created, unique challenges to offering telehealth services were present, such as a lack of regulatory clarity on psychologists’ ability to practice across state lines, the need to develop and implement a mission statement, as well as the need to tailor various policies and procedures to meet the requirements of the spoke sites in the absence of national TMH standards (e.g., referral processes, clinic availability, scheduling, risk/safety protocols). Since that time, the development of national recommendations regarding protocols and procedures are underway. Hub leadership consulted with multiple VA committees (including ethics and regional counsel), licensing boards, and non-VA national associations to ensure that the delivery of services were within the scope of practice of the Hub psychologists. The American Psychological Association’s “Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology” and the 50-state review were reviewed (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013). Subsequently in 2018, VA implemented a national Anywhere to Anywhere program to further increase the accessibility of services to Veterans across the United States (Authority of Health Care Providers to Practice Telehealth, 2018). This key piece of legislation allows VA clinicians to provide care across state lines, despite varying state licensure requirements, directly ameliorating challenges to deliver necessary services in areas where retaining providers may be difficult. The steps taken by VA NYH TMH Hub leadership, the presence of state and expansion of national guidelines, in conjunction with the growing body of research on the efficacy of telehealth services, have enhanced the ease of delivery of TMH services.
“Network model” considerations
The VA NYH TMH Hub is structured as a “network model,” with one Hub psychologist serving as a primary point of contact (POC) for each spoke site, to provide full access to the range of clinicians’ expertise to all spoke sites. The POC acts as the first line of communication between referring providers, telehealth staff, administrative and leadership staff at the spoke site and shares information directly to the Hub psychologists at weekly staff meetings. This model allows for efficient bidirectional communication between the spoke site and Hub psychologists, timely assignment of new referrals and facilitates expansion of services to new spoke sites. The administrative demands inherent in the POC role have shifted through the establishment of services, with more frequent telephone and e-mail contact between Hub psychologists and spoke site clinical and technical staff during initiation of services, and reduced contact, as collaboratively agreed upon by Hub and spoke site staff, throughout maintenance and growth of services. A challenge inherent in this model is the administrative load on Hub psychologists who are required to maintain up-to-date knowledge regarding variations in procedures across spoke sites (e.g., preferences for scheduling and management of emergency situations) and subsequently set shift multiple times throughout the day, depending on the Veteran’s spoke site location.
Integration of Hub missions
On a programmatic level, an ongoing challenge of the Hub has been to meet the multiple demands of the mission alongside the general VA requirements of mental health providers. The VA NYH TMH Hub’s mission is threefold: (a) provide high-quality, short-term, evidence-based clinical care to rural Veterans, (b) evaluate the effectiveness of TMH and ability to successfully treat complex presenting issues through ongoing research and quality improvement; (d) train psychology graduate students at various levels of training (e.g., extern, predoctoral interns and postdoctoral fellows) in the provision of TMH services. Consistent with the mission, Hub psychologists provide direct patient care, as well as play an active role in quality improvement, research projects, and supervision of doctoral-level students. Hub psychologists attend three weekly meetings (staff, quality improvement/research, and peer supervision) to discuss administrative/logistical issues, research projects and clinical issues, in addition to larger departmental and supervision meetings. Because of the evolving initiatives of VA to increase accessibility of direct patient care, practical challenges have been noted in balancing the Hub’s three missions, with the requirements and needs of the larger psychology department, in terms of delineation of time in clinical and administrative duties. Nevertheless, balancing the Hub’s three missions facilitates a key dynamic feedback loop by expanding and improving clinical care through ongoing research and training.
Lastly, in alignment with VA’s mission to improve access to care and to ease the administrative load on Hub psychologists, a large shift has been made to increase V2H visits. The transition to V2H sessions reduces common scheduling challenges of limited clinic and/or telehealth equipment availability at rural VA outpatient clinics. Hub psychologists consider the appropriateness of fit for V2H visits prior to initiation (e.g., risk level and/or a Veteran with severe depression and anhedonia may benefit from leaving his or her home for an appointment) and discuss possible options with the Veteran, referring providers and spoke site staff as needed. In addition, to facilitate the scheduling processes of all VA appointments (e.g., clinic appointments and V2H visits), Hub psychologists have transitioned to using a standard scheduling order, thus limiting scheduling correspondences via e-mail between various schedulers at each spoke site. The combination of the use of V2H visits and standardized scheduling procedures has improved the efficiency of the scheduling process and decreased the administrative burden on Hub providers, thus facilitating increased availability for high quality, direct patient care.
Discussion

As TMH services grow within VA and other community mental health settings, pragmatic support regarding program development will continue to inform effective implementation and expansion for clinicians, technical and leadership staff. Hub psychologists emphasized the value of considering clinical, technical and administrative barriers and facilitators, as well as how the facilitators can be utilized to mitigate challenges moving forward. The issues raised are largely consistent with previous research, yet the current work expands the literature base by highlighting additional considerations for implementing TMH services, specifically related to the structure of the NYH TMH Hub and the ways in which the therapeutic relationship may be impacted. See Figure 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Key considerations for developing and implementing a Telemental Health Hub (TMH) structure and “network model” of organization.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
and Figure 2
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 2. Key clinical considerations for Telemental Health (TMH) providers for developing and implementing a TMH program.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
for a summary of key considerations.
Hub Structure and “Network Model” of Organization
The VA NYH TMH Hub network model of organization was consistently recognized as an important factor supporting implementation of services. Although integration into multidisciplinary teams and procedural variations across sites was noted to be challenging, the model of organization supports access to a range of specialized, evidence-based therapies and assessments across various modalities, maximizing the breadth and depth of services provided to Veterans in rural areas. A designated POC at each spoke site streamlines logistical processes and serves as conduit of communication between leadership, clinical providers and technical staff. Furthermore, the network model allows for adaptation and flexibility, as the stage of program development evolves over time. The VA NYH TMH Hub established services with spoke sites in a gradual, stepwise manner, which allowed for collaboration among POCs to discuss key tips and troubleshoot issues, prior to initiating services with a new site.
Hub psychologists also identified the integration of the Hub’s three missions: clinical, research, and training, as a critical factor supporting the program growth and development. Hub psychologists recognized challenges delineating time to simultaneously support clinical, research and training goals, while also balancing the larger clinical priorities of the VA medical center. However, consideration of these three overlapping processes ultimately support growth and change. More specifically, research goals focused on evaluating and understanding clinical outcomes and satisfaction with telehealth, allow the program to readily adapt and improve, as well as consider how to engage hard-to-reach Veterans. In addition, the integration of the three missions serves as a critical framework to train the next generation of TMH providers. Hub psychologists supervise doctoral students, as well as provide education and consultation to spoke site clinical providers, which ultimately supports dissemination of education and information regarding implementation of evidence-based therapies via TMH.
Therapeutic Relationship Considerations
The impact of TMH on the clinical process is an important area to consider when developing and modifying TMH programs. Geographical separation affects the ability to create a shared physical space to provide necessary comfort and can make it difficult to be attuned to nonverbal communication. Technical difficulties can negatively affect Hub psychologists’ ability to see and hear Veterans, increasing challenges to emotional safety. Nevertheless, Hub psychologists emphasized the unique opportunities that TMH care presents, in terms of the ability to treat hard-to-reach patients, enhance clinical interventions by moving them outside the therapy office, and paradoxically foster closeness in some therapeutic relationships, through allowing vulnerability to develop in a unique manner. Hub psychologists regularly discuss perceptions of TMH and the therapeutic process with Veterans throughout treatment, to identify pertinent issues and adapt treatment accordingly. In addition, Hub psychologists recognize the importance of liaising with spoke site clinical referring providers to effectively introduce TMH to Veterans, answer questions and consider the appropriateness of referrals. It is important to note that although this paper focuses on provider experiences, Hub psychologists are also pursuing formalized assessment of Veterans’ experiences of TMH through qualitative telephone interviews at the conclusion of treatment, to better understand challenges and facilitators from the Veteran perspective. Recognition of the challenges and facilitators of TMH treatment can encourage buy in and growth of the TMH modality for patients, clinical referring providers, and leadership staff, as it opens an honest dialogue about expectations of psychotherapy through TMH.
Implications and Future Directions
The VA NYH TMH Hub continues to evolve in response to the considerations outlined in this paper. To address clinical barriers, Hub psychologists have created patient and provider materials to disseminate education and information regarding the TMH process, expectations and clinicians’ areas of expertise, to support fruitful discussion related to the benefits and challenges of TMH and highlight referrals that best fit the TMH modality and structure. Moreover, materials support collaborative informed consent prior to initiation of treatment, so Veterans can freely choose to decline or participate in TMH services, consistent with guidelines that support shared decision making (United States Department of Veteran Affairs, 2009). In addition, Hub psychologists have initiated communication with spoke site clinical and leadership staff to collaborate regarding treatment planning and disposition of diagnostically complex cases during and following TMH treatment. It is also possible for Hub psychologists to collaborate with additional TMH programs in the NYC area, particularly to refer Veterans’ family members for treatment when applicable. Weekly staff and peer supervision meetings provide opportunities for consultation regarding clinical challenges, as well as to monitor and adapt treatment for Veterans who may not respond to interventions as expected. Hub psychologists are working to develop a referral protocol for Veterans with complex presenting issues, to further support assessment and diagnostic clarification prior to the initiation of treatment, as well as to target key treatment goals and anticipate challenges for disposition when short-term treatment ends. Collaboration among TMH programs will be useful to creatively and effectively address resource related issues, as programs develop to meet the needs of Veterans presenting with complicated presenting problems.
The VA NYH TMH Hub works closely with technical staff to manage technology updates for services to Veterans’ homes to ameliorate the challenges of managing technological and equipment difficulties. Technical staff conduct test calls prior to initiation of TMH services to home to enhance Veteran knowledge of the platform, as well as explore whether video streaming is possible given the capabilities of the Veteran’s Internet service. The VA NYH TMH Hub is exploring options for online platforms that would allow for secure transmission of measures and handouts on a shared, encrypted browser, to mitigate challenges associated with transmitting sensitive materials between veteran and clinician in the current system of communication.
To address administrative challenges, Hub psychologists regularly revise risk protocols, V2H protocols and scheduling procedures based on feedback from staff. Hub psychologists also maintain up-to-date information regarding spoke site scheduling, documentation and logistical procedures on a master spreadsheet. Additionally, plans to condense meetings on a rotating basis will be piloted (e.g., recurring weekly 60-min meetings with the focus of the meeting changing each week), to increase availability of Hub psychologists, while still providing sufficient support to meet the Hub’s mission and VA’s larger goals.
In consideration of expanding opportunities for training and expert consultation within TMH, it will be useful to look at applications of the Extension for Community Health Care Outcomes (ECHO) model. The model improves access to care for underserved populations managing complex medical conditions, by connecting rural areas with the resources of urban, medical centers via technology (Arora et al., 2007, 2011). The Specialty Care Access Network ECHO (SCAN-ECHO) is an outgrowth of the model, where VA specialty medical teams use telehealth to connect with Veterans’ local primary care providers to provide consultation, case discussion and didactics regarding issues such as pain management, diabetes, hepatitis C and liver disease. The model leverages technology to improve interdisciplinary collaboration and enhance chronic disease management outcomes, where resources are scarce (Arora et al., 2010; Ball, Wilson, Ober, & Mchaourab, 2018; Watts, Roush, Julius, & Sood, 2016). The SCAN-ECHO model creates a framework for consultation and teaching regarding psychiatric issues in a more structured manner, to continue to support training of psychology graduate students and spoke site staff involved in treating complex cases. Moreover, applications of the model are poised to effectively support TMH buy in and growth, by efficiently disseminating knowledge and best practices with technology aided means, reducing feelings of isolation among rural providers and enhancing rural providers’ specialized skill sets in treating complex psychiatric issues.
The team has adapted to the “network” model, as clinical POCs maintain communication with spoke site clinical and technical staff and relay information to team members at weekly meetings. In addition, Hub psychologists collaborate with spoke site leadership, clinical and technical staff to assess their perceptions of barriers and facilitators to the provision of TMH services. As a future quality improvement project, the experience of staff at the spoke sites is being gathered through a brief self-report questionnaire and qualitative telephone interview with TCTs, clinicians, and leadership, with the goal of continuing to revise procedures and protocols by incorporating spoke site feedback.
Identifying barriers and facilitators to program implementation provides a framework for the initiation and development of new Hubs, monitoring and improving structures and processes, and enhancing the effectiveness of mental health care in rural populations. Furthermore, current considerations provide guidelines for troubleshooting clinical, technical and administrative issues, as well as practical guidance for clinicians, technical and leadership staff to support TMH growth. As TMH continues to expand, a nuanced approach to the development and implementation of TMH programs has the potential to influence best practices.",
"37": "The Veterans Affairs Health Care System (VA) is the largest provider of telehealth services in the country, with over 2.1 million VA telehealth visits to Veteran patients, of which 45% are rural Veterans (VHA Office of Rural Health, 2016). Telehealth is broadly defined as the provision of physical and mental health care through the use of telecommunication technologies—telepsychology or telemental health (TMH) is a subset of telehealth. The American Psychological Association (APA; 2013) defines telepsychology as “the provision of psychological services using telecommunication technologies” (p. 3). Examples of telecommunication technologies include, but are not limited to, telephone, mobile apps, interactive videoconferencing, e-mail, chat, text, and web-based interventions. Depending on the technology used, information transmitted between patients and providers may be occurring synchronously (occurring in real time) or asynchronously (occurring at different time points) and may include text, graphics, video, sounds, or other data. For the purposes of this article, the focus will be on TMH, or telepsychology, and on clinical video telehealth (CVT), which is synchronous videoconferencing.
The extant literature suggests that TMH produces results that are comparable with in-person mental health care with respect to assessment, treatment outcomes, therapeutic relationship, retention, and both patient and provider satisfaction (Hyler, Gangure, & Batchhelder, 2005; Pruitt, Luxton, & Shore, 2014). Furthermore, TMH has been found to offer unique benefits when compared with in-person treatment, including increased disclosure in session (Gibson, O’Donnell, Coulson, & Kakepetum-Schultz, 2011), improved access to services, convenience, flexibility, and potential cost savings (Pruitt et al., 2014). In sum, TMH appears to be an effective, well-accepted, and cost-effective platform to deliver mental health treatment to those that may not otherwise be able to access such treatment (Richardson, Frueh, Grubaugh, Egede, & Elhai, 2009).
Just as TMH serves as an effective bridge to providing care to individuals that may not otherwise be able to access such treatment, telesupervision has the potential to offer trainees and professionals access to supervision and consultation services that may otherwise be inaccessible. It is notable that trainees tend to stay and become employed in the location that they are trained, with over 60% of physician residents opting to live within 100 miles of their final residency program, and that psychology internship sites, in particular, may heavily influence location of newly trained psychologists’ first jobs (Jameson & Blank, 2007; U.S Department of Veterans Affairs, 2018b). Thus, providing training, supervision, and consultation opportunities, by way of telesupervision, in geographical areas of mental health shortage may allow for the recruitment and retention of needed mental health professionals in these areas. Furthermore, through telesupervision, skilled providers in rural communities would be able to offer supervision, consultation, and training to trainees and professionals seeking additional support in working with rurally located individuals regardless of geographic location.
For the purposes of this article, the focus will be on the training of doctoral-level psychology interns and postdoctoral psychology residents in their individual supervision requirements. The VA has long been a primary source for psychology education, with a focus on training psychologists to care for rural and potentially underserved veterans (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2018a). Psychology training in the VA is governed by the Office of Academic Affiliations (VA OAA), which mandates that the VA assist in the training of health professionals for its own needs and those of the nation (Veterans’ Benefits, 2014). For over 70 years, in accordance with the VA’s 1946 Policy Memorandum No. 2 (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 1946), the VA has partnered with university training programs to provide high-quality mental health care and to train new health professionals to meet the needs of America’s veterans. To ensure that VA training is both current and consistent with the broader psychology training standards, VA psychology training programs are expected to maintain APA accreditation and Association of Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers membership.
Currently, the APA (2015) Commission on Accreditation Standards of Accreditation supports up to 50% of the supervision requirement (for both internship and postdoctoral training programs) to be met via telesupervision (i.e., 1 hr [or less] of individual telesupervision per week and 2 hr [or less] of total [combined group and individual] supervision per week). The implementation regulations state that there may be benefits to in-person supervision (e.g., recognition of nonverbal cues), and thus the remaining supervision requirement should be met in person. Given APA support for telesupervision, it is notable that, at this time, the VA OAA (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2015) does not permit telesupervision as a general principle; however, programs may request special consideration of their telehealth training programs from VA OAA.
Given the wealth of information pointing to the efficacy of CVT and the APA standards supporting its use, the somewhat limited research found related to the use of CVT for telesupervision is surprising. In a review of the literature of technology-assisted supervision and training (TAST), Rousmaniere (2014) found 49 publications that had a significant focus on TAST. Twenty-six of the 49 publications reviewed consisted of original research, and 23 of the 49 consisted of discussions of new technologies, case examples, or reviews of the current literature. Out of the 23 original research studies, nine focused on web-based training programs, seven studied asynchronous technology (e.g., e-mail or text) as augments to supervision, nine examined group telesupervision, and there were no studies of individual supervision. Of the nine studies that examined group telesupervision, five examined telesupervision via phone or live chat (text only) and one examined the training content rather than the telesupervision itself. Because the focus of this article is CVT, the remaining three (Panos, 2005; Reese et al., 2009; Ruble, McGrew, Toland, Dalrymple, & Jung, 2013) of the nine studies identified by Rousmaniere (2014) will be discussed along with an additional three studies relating to telesupervision via CVT that were not a part of the Rousmaniere review (Bender & Dykeman, 2016; Gammon, Sørlie, Bergvik, & Høifødt, 1998; Marrow, Hollyoake, Hamer, & Kenrick, 2002).
In the six studies identified as examining telesupervision in a synchronous CVT format, overwhelmingly, the authors found no differences in satisfaction with the supervision process, supervisory working alliance, or perceived effectiveness or self-efficacy. It is notable that five of the studies were considered “exploratory” in nature and either included small samples or were nonparametric or qualitative in design (Bender & Dykeman, 2016; Gammon et al., 1998; Marrow et al., 2002; Panos, 2005; Reese et al., 2009). The remaining study was adequately powered to detect significant change (Ruble et al., 2013). Qualitative feedback across the studies included five themes. First, telesupervisees reported “feeling connected” to peers in the group supervision cohort (Panos, 2005). Second, paradoxically, the limited visual cues imposed by the CVT modality increased the emphasis on verbal aspects of communication and improved supervision process (Gammon et al., 1998). Third, because of the reliance on verbal communication, there was greater emphasis on staying on task and being clear with verbal content (Reese et al., 2009). Fourth, there were challenges related to technological difficulties and lack of training in the technology (Marrow et al., 2002; Reese et al., 2009). And lastly, fifth, it may have been important to have an established relationship in person prior to engaging in telesupervision (Reese et al., 2009).
Although no studies of individual telesupervision were found, the project leaders posit that there is growing and adequate support from the literature and from the APA Standards of Accreditation (APA, 2015) as well to implement telesupervision. Taken as a whole, the following justifications served as the basis for the current evidence-based practice (EBP) project: the review of the literature, APA support for telesupervision, the need for increased accessibility to supervision (particularly for clinicians and trainees in rural or remote areas), reductions in travel-related costs, improvements in flexibility of scheduling afforded by the technology, and increased access for peer consultation. Additionally, providing trainees with opportunities to both deliver and “receive” TMH (via telesupervision) may increase competency in a growing and cutting-edge platform for care as well as give trainees a unique opportunity to potentially experience the patient’s perspective of “receiving” TMH.
VA Pacific Islands Health Care System (VAPIHCS) has received an exception to provide telesupervision, which is implemented in addition to the usual in-person supervision. Consequently, by providing telesupervision to psychology interns and residents, VAPIHCS is able to provide psychology trainees with training opportunities in rural areas and also increase access to care for rural veterans. The use of telesupervision also serves to modernize internal processes which is one of the five major goals of the Department of Veterans Affairs (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2018a). Thus, VAPIHCS is in a unique position to provide valuable information on the usefulness of telesupervision to VAPIHCS training programs and perhaps to the rest of the VA and other groups considering this method of supervision to trainees.
The current EBP project sought to assess any differences in VAPIHCS psychology trainees’ satisfaction and working alliance perceptions of telesupervision to that of the current usual and standard practice of clinical supervision delivered in person. The quantitative and qualitative results of this project should help identify the practicality and feasibility of telesupervision at VAPIHCS and highlight potential strategies to improve the delivery of telesupervision in the VAPIHCS and perhaps in other training programs.
Method

Program and Trainees
The VAPIHCS Psychology Training Program is located in Honolulu, Hawaii. The program functions within a unique system with a vast catchment area spanning thousands of miles, providing telehealth services to Saipan, Guam, American Samoa, and the neighboring Hawaiian Islands. The psychology training program is primarily located within the main facility in Honolulu, while psychologists are located in geographical locations at different clinics throughout the system. Psychology trainees have the opportunity to provide TMH to these diverse geographical areas, providing needed care in rural settings while also gaining an enriched training experience. To ensure the highest competency in providing supervision, the training program identified psychologists providing TMH to (or at times located within) these remote clinics as most equipped to provide supervision to trainees based on their knowledge of providing TMH and competency in working with the particular rural patient population. The VAPIHCS program training director wrote a detailed policy that outlined the rationale for use of telesupervision, including compliance with APA SoA. The policy was reviewed and approved by VA OAA, which served as the basis for granting of the waiver to allow telesupervision at VAPIHCS. This policy, included in the training manual and given to all trainees and supervisors, outlines (a) backup on-site supervision availability during telehealth encounters, (b) how to access emergency assistance, (c) ways for patients to access supervisors, and (d) the structure of telesupervision.
At the onset of the training year, all trainees participated in a baseline competency assessment to identify their strengths and growth edges. This information, along with a rank listing of their interests, was used to appropriately assign trainees to rotations. Rotations were 6 months in length, with trainees participating in two rotations concurrently (resulting in participation in a total of four rotations throughout the 12-month training year and resulting in trainees participating in a TMH rotation while participating in an in-person rotation in tandem). The in-person supervision rotations included outpatient and residential posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), Primary Care-Mental Health Integration, inpatient or critical care, outpatient general mental health, Homeless Patient Aligned Care Teams, and triage services that are located both at the main VA facility in Honolulu and at the Community Based Outreach Clinic on the west side of Oahu. The trainees in a TMH rotation provided telehealth services to neighboring Hawaiian Islands, American Samoa, Saipan, and/or Guam. The care within both in-person and TMH rotations included a wide array of clinical presentations and general mental health concerns (e.g., PTSD, suicidal behaviors, and personality disorders) within a highly diverse patient population representative of the various groups living within the Pacific Basin. As such, the process of rotation assignment, rotation experience (e.g., population served, hours of care), and supervisors within the rotations were the same for both interns and residents.
Of important note, the supervisors providing telesupervision were different than those who were providing in-person supervision. Telesupervisors were physically located on another island from the trainee and therefore trainees did not have physical access to the telesupervisor for day-to-day operations. At one point in the training year, the trainees traveled to one of the rural locations with a telesupervisor for approximately 1 week to provide in-person care, continuing to provide TMH for the remainder of the rotation period. During the TMH rotation, live observation of the trainee was achieved by the telesupervisor dialing in for a three-way connection using CVT, enabling the telesupervisor to observe the trainee in real time with the patient. The trainees participated in scheduled weekly individual supervision using CVT with their assigned telesupervisor, which was consistent with how they engaged in in-person supervision with their supervisor. Consequently, the in-person and telehealth rotations were parallel experiences, in that both included the same amount of direct clinical care; trainees met with supervisors for supervision individually on a weekly basis; trainees had access to supervisors (i.e., via in-person or technology) in between scheduled supervision sessions as needed; and trainees provided care to a veteran population within the Pacific Basin with a wide range of presenting mental health concerns.
The EBP project was developed to assess potential perceived differences in satisfaction and working alliance between telesupervision and the current usual and standard in-person supervision being provided within the VAPIHCS training program. The EBP project underwent a rigorous review process and was approved by the VAPIHCS EBP Council and executive leadership. As a part of the review process, it was deemed that the project did not constitute human subjects research and would only use anonymous data routinely collected for purposes of program evaluation, and thus was not subject to institutional review board approval. After completion of training, the training director sent all psychology interns (n = 8) and postdoctoral residents (n = 4) who had participated in telesupervision (total, N = 12 trainees from 2015–2017) an invitation to complete an anonymous online questionnaire regarding their supervision experiences.
Demographics
All 12 trainees (eight interns and four postdoctoral residents) who were sent the questionnaire completed it. The trainee participants were a varied sample to include diversity in gender (five female, six male, and one transgender), racial/ethnic group (five Asian American, six White, one mixed race/ethnicity, and age group (six late-20s/early-30s, two mid-30s/late-30s, and four late-30s/mid, 40s). The trainees participated in more in-person rotations during the training year than TMH rotations, consequently leading to more exposure to in-person supervisors. The in-person supervisors were both male and female genders, ranged in different races/ethnicities, and included both early and later career psychologists. There were two different supervisors providing telesupervision to the participants, with both being located on different islands from the trainees. One telesupervisor was male, White, and an early career psychologist. The other telesupervisor was female, White, and a late career psychologist. Both supervisors regularly provided TMH to the geographical regions in which the trainee participants were also providing TMH.
Measures
The anonymous online questionnaire included the Supervisory Working Alliance Inventory-Trainee Version (SWAI-T; Efstation, Patton, & Kardash, 1990) and qualitative items to explore perceptions of implementation, satisfaction, and efficacy of supervision. The SWAI-T is a 19-item measure that uses a 7-point Likert scale with response choices ranging from 1 (almost never) to 7 (almost always). Studies have found that the SWAI-T demonstrates good internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha = .70–.99; Efstation et al., 1990; Reese et al., 2009). Furthermore, Jackson (1993) reported high correlations between the SWAI-T and measures of supervisory style and supervisee self-efficacy, thus suggesting strong construct validity. Consistent with prior studies that have used this measure, the Rapport and Client Focus scales were combined (Patton & Kivlighan, 1997; Reese et al., 2009). The trainees were asked to complete the SWAI-T once in regard to their experience with their in-person supervisors and once in regard to their telesupervisors. The trainees were asked to respond to qualitative items asking about (a) differences in disclosure to supervisors between tele- and in-person supervisors, (b) barriers to engaging in telesupervision and how trainees overcame these barriers, and (c) benefits to telesupervision and recommendations to others participating in telehealth.
Data Analysis
Quantitative data were analyzed using SPSS (Version 23) statistical software. These data were checked and screened for errors prior to running any analyses. Descriptive analyses were examined to assess for normality as well as obtain means and standard deviations for all the project’s key elements. The Wilcoxon signed-ranks test was used for comparisons of SWAI-T scale score ratings across in-person and telesupervision modalities. Effect sizes were computed by dividing the z score by the square root of the observations; effect sizes of r > .3 are considered medium, and r > .5 are considered large (Field, 2005). A p value of 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance. A phenomenological-based thematic analysis approach was utilized to examine the qualitative data. Qualitative data were initially reviewed by both project leaders multiple times independently to gain familiarity with the data. Each project leader then independently coded the data to identify emerging patterns, utilizing an electronic log that included columns to delineate emerging themes and place relevant data within these themes. The project leaders subsequently met to review the emerging themes, while reexamining the raw data and identifying further themes and subthemes from the raw data. The project leaders then independently reviewed the data again to identify larger patterns of response, identified as superordinate themes. After finalizing the superordinate themes, themes, and subthemes, both project leaders then returned to the data to ensure the themes appropriately captured the nuanced meaning of the data.
Results

Quantitative Findings
The type of supervision platform (i.e., in-person vs. telesupervision) did not appear to impact the Client Focus scale of the SWAI-T (z = −1.08, p = .28, r = .31), with a mean scale score of 6.39 when evaluating in-person supervision experiences and 6.43 when evaluating telesupervision experiences. The type of supervision platform did appear to significantly impact the Rapport scale of the SWAI-T (z = −2.49, p = .01, r = .72), with a mean scale score of 6.26 when evaluating in-person supervision experiences and 6.79 when evaluating telesupervision experiences (see Table 1).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Wilcoxon Signed Ranks Test for the Client Focus and Rapport Scales of the Supervisory Working Alliance Inventory-Trainee Version Across In-Person and Telesupervision Modalities (N = 12)
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
In response to a question regarding whether trainees would recommend telesupervision to others, 100% (N = 12) of trainees stated that they would recommend telesupervision to other trainees. In response to a question related to the quality of telesupervision, 83.3% (n = 10) of trainees stated that the quality of the supervision was not affected by the CVT modality. It is notable that of the two trainees who endorsed that the quality of supervision was affected by the CVT modality, one stated that the quality of telesupervision was better than in-person supervision and the other stated that the quality of telesupervision was worse than in-person supervision.
Qualitative Findings
The qualitative data provide three superordinate themes in understanding the experience of trainees in using telesupervision: (a) challenges to telesupervision, (b) benefits to telesupervision, and (c) components of successful telesupervision. Within the three superordinate themes, themes and subthemes were identified (see Tables 2,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Superordinate Theme: Challenges to Telesupervision
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
3,
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Superordinate Theme: Benefits to Telesupervision
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
and 4).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Superordinate Theme: Components of Successful Telesupervision
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Overall, the quantity of qualitative data identifying benefits to telesupervision was greater than the identification of challenges to telesupervision. Although the overall quantitative results did not indicate any differences between in-person and telesupervision, a small quantity of qualitative data suggest there may be some trainees for which telesupervision is less ideal based on their learning and developmental needs: One trainee indicated that the quality of supervision was lower in telesupervision when compared with in-person supervision. It is notable that this trainee also self-identified as having more intensive learning needs and suggested that those trainees who have greater growth edges may have more difficulty engaging in telesupervision. The qualitative results further indicate that trainees may be a better fit for telesupervision if they do not have large competency concerns, exhibit traits of flexibility and ability to express needs, and desire to function more autonomously. All trainees recommended engaging in telesupervision, even those that identified experiencing some barriers.
Discussion

The findings from both the quantitative and qualitative data from this EBP project are consistent with the research literature base. This project’s findings suggest that telesupervision and in-person supervision are perceived to be equitable in overall quality from the trainee perspective. Although the quantitative data suggest that rapport with the supervisor is higher in telesupervision, this finding interpreted within the context of the qualitative data suggests that it may have been the competency and supervisory ability of the assigned telesupervisor that led to this rapport. Based on the results, it is likely that differences between telesupervision and in-person supervision are related to individual variables of either the supervisor and/or the trainee rather than the platform of supervision implementation. Taken in sum, the findings from this study provide insight into the idea that the same components that create good supervision in person, such as a supportive relationship and strong working alliance (Falender & Shafranske, 2009), are important regardless of the platform.
The qualitative data lend credence to multiple areas of perceived value in telesupervision, with the majority of trainees expressing high value for their telesupervision experience. Findings support the importance of participating in TMH, both in clinical care and telesupervision. Within the delivery of mental health care, there is already an increasing use of technology for clinical care, further underscoring the high likelihood of psychology interns and residents currently in training being required to provide TMH in the future. The qualitative data suggest that one of the perceived benefits in receiving supervision via CVT was a better understanding of the patient experience by being on the receiving end of CVT services.
In addition, the qualitative data point toward telesupervision benefits related to exposure to certain clinical populations, such as those in rural settings, that they would not otherwise work with while gaining increased comfort using this platform. As stated earlier, rural populations represent populations in great need of clinical services, and these individuals are increasingly receiving care via CVT (VHA Office of Rural Health, 2016) as a means of filling gaps in resources. Thus, telesupervision has the potential to provide both unique opportunities related to rural patient care and diversity in training, which may lead to increases in the diversity of staff and trainees as well as competency in future providers working with underserved populations. Although on-site supervisors could provide supervision of the trainee’s clinical encounters occurring over CVT, the supervisors most appropriate to supervise these cases would be other supervisors also providing TMH care to rural veterans. Telesupervision potentially serves the purpose of not only increasing access for clinical care in underserved populations but also allowing those psychologists who are most knowledgeable about the platform and population being served to effectively provide supervision. Finally, the use of telesupervision could enhance the experience of psychology trainees by providing opportunities to draw on the professional expertise of providers who may work in clinics that are located at a distance from the main facility as well as generally add to the number of psychologists that are able to provide supervision in TMH. These increases in opportunities and diversity of staff and trainees have the potential to increase access and improve costs for both patient care and training.
The findings from this study also provide insight that the functioning of the technology system can impact the quality of the telesupervision experience. The importance of technology assistance and backup supervision are both important aspects of successful telesupervision. Thus, it is not just having competent telesupervisors available but also how the educational program and technology system are set up to provide quality supervision that appear to influence positive supervision outcomes.
Suggestions for Use of Telesupervision
Although the overall results suggest that the experience of the trainee is equitable across telesupervision and in-person supervision modalities, the qualitative data also point toward the need for training programs to be thoughtful in the implementation of telesupervision. Based on the review of the literature and findings from this project, the following suggestions are made for the efficacious implementation of telesupervision. First, training programs need to have a clear policy on the use of telesupervision that adheres to APA SoA. Aligning with APA SoA requirements (APA, 2015), this policy should highlight the following: emergency procedures in case of patient crisis, how live supervision/observation is achieved, on-site supervision resources, protocol for accessing supervision resources between scheduled sessions, and ways for patients to be able to access supervisors.
Second, based on the findings from this project, it would be prudent to screen trainees to determine the goodness of fit and readiness to engage in telesupervision. Because telesupervision does require trainees to be somewhat proactive in how they avail themselves of supervisors, trainees who have greater difficulty with self-initiative (e.g., problem-solving technology difficulties, asking for what they need in supervision, initiating/responding to contact with supervisor vs. running into them in clinic) may find telesupervision more challenging. One potential reason for this difficulty might be that the technology and physical distance between the supervisor and trainee may add additional stress in getting needs met, adding a greater burden to trainees already in need of more intensive supervision. A baseline competency assessment that includes both an understanding of the trainee’s learning needs and competencies, goals, and their individual approaches to learning may help to better identify those trainees more likely to engage more easily in telesupervision.
Third, both based on the results of this project and the extant literature, trainees need to have clear instruction on how to effectively utilize the technology, ways to problem solve technology issues and how to obtain technological support, and an opportunity to adjust to being supervised by this platform (Marrow et al., 2002; Reese et al., 2009). The supervision experience will be more successful if trainees are given the opportunity to discuss initial discomfort (in both providing clinical care and engaging in supervision) with CVT. Thus, there needs to be more investment in the beginning of a training experience involving telesupervision compared with in-person supervision. It is not as simple as matching a trainee to a supervisor and briefly telling them how to use the equipment.
Fourth, based on the qualitative feedback collated in this project, it may be important to provide a clear opportunity and format for supervisors to provide live supervision/observation of patient interactions. CVT can be used to connect multiple sites simultaneously, which can be used to bring supervisors into the same virtual room as the patient and trainee clinician. The way in which the supervisor connects with the trainee and provides timely and meaningful feedback is especially important given the physical distance. Finally, the training program would benefit from careful consideration regarding the supervisors selected to provide telehealth supervision. Just as trainees may need to make effort to engage outside of regularly scheduled supervision sessions (i.e., informal supervision will not be achieved by dropping by the supervisors office but may be achieved via instant message, telephone, or CVT), supervisors who are less willing to be available for consultation in between supervision sessions or are less responsive via e-mail, phone, or instant message are not ideal candidates for telesupervision regardless of their other supervisory or clinical strengths.
As part of the sustainment of this project and ongoing efforts to continue to improve implementation of telesupervision, the VAPIHCS Psychology Training Program will continue to assess learning and developmental needs as part of a baseline competency assessment at the start of the internship and residency training years. This information will be used to better ensure that trainees assigned to the telehealth rotation will be an appropriate fit for telesupervision. In addition, the training program has developed more specific instructions related to logistics and access to on-demand supervision to ensure maximum benefit from telesupervision. Finally, trainees receiving telesupervision will continue to be paired with a rotation with on-site supervision.
Limitations and Future Directions
Although the current EBP project provides valuable information on the engagement of trainees in telesupervision at a VA facility, the data also have limitations related to the nature of the project. Because this project was based on a limited number of trainees that were naturally not randomized, the generalizability of results is limited. This project included only interns and residents; however, it did not delineate between different developmental levels of trainees of interns or residents and did not include practicum-level students. Thus, a future project may include assessing the influence of the developmental level of the trainee on participation in telesupervision, which may provide valuable information on how to best meet the developmental needs of supervisees.
Another limiting factor is the potential confound between supervisor and supervision modality. The two telesupervisors provided only telesupervision. and the in-person supervisors provided only in-person supervision. Thus, it is possible that any findings are related to the supervisors rather than the modality of treatment. That said, there were two different telesupervisors and several different in-person supervisors, thus mitigating the potential effect of this limitation. All the same, future research on telesupervision with a greater sample of supervisors and supervisees would add to the generalizability of this project.
This project highlights possible areas that could be further explored, specifically in relationship to how telesupervision is implemented. With the increase in TMH, the need to examine the supervision impact continues to increase. This EBP project had a qualitative component that identifies some areas that may be suitable for a research approach. For example, the individual variables of trainees that would most benefit from telesupervision and examining whether telesupervision affects the skill development of trainees with regard to how they are performing on competency-based evaluations within their training experience may benefit from further research. Although not cited specifically in any of the qualitative responses as a contributor to a positive telesupervision experience, the trainees in this program did meet in person and collaborate with the telesupervisor for 1 week in the rural setting at some point in the rotation experience. It is currently unknown the extent to which this is an important component of the telesupervisory experience and is an empirical question for future research. It would also be beneficial to examine the use of telesupervision from the perspective of the supervisor. Given the continuing expansion of the use of technology in the daily work of psychologists, including the delivery of clinical care, it is important to ensure that the knowledge base of the use of technology within supervision continues to expand in tandem.",
"38": "Stress is common in agricultural occupations. With the use of heavy machinery and dangerous tools, farming is one of the most hazardous occupations (Freeman, Schwab, & Jiang, 2008). Physical health may be compromised through the use of pesticides and other chemicals, resulting in acute or chronic effects on the nervous, respiratory, immune, endocrine, and/or reproductive systems (Blair, Ritz, Wesseling, & Beane Freeman, 2015). In addition to physical stressors, farm-related tasks, external factors, and interpersonal stressors increase the vulnerability of farmers to mental health concerns (Lunner Kolstrup et al., 2013; Onwuameze, Paradiso, Peek-Asa, Donham, & Rautiainen, 2013). Farm-related tasks include long days, isolation, heavy workload, technological innovation, business management, and farm administration. External factors, such as disease outbreaks, natural disasters, government regulations, climate changes, and market fluctuations, are unpredictable. Finally, interpersonal stressors related to family roles (e.g., family caregiving, conflict, divorce, and spouse’s employment off the farm) have the potential to increase stress (Hovey & Seligman, 2006). With the risk of injury and exposure to chemicals, combined with family pressures and long hours, farmers and ranchers may have a higher risk of developing mental health illnesses (Fraser et al., 2005).
The impact of stress on the mental health of farmers is a growing concern. Prevalence rates of depression in agricultural workers in the Midwest have varied from 7.4% to 24% (Onwuameze et al., 2013). Farming is an occupation with a higher suicide rate than the general population (Behere & Bhise, 2009), and gender differences exist, as rural men evidence higher suicide rates than rural women in most countries (Sauvaget et al., 2009). In addition to poor mental health outcomes, farmers have an increased prevalence of chronic health conditions, including cardiovascular and respiratory disease, arthritis, and skin cancer (Kirkhorn & Schenker, 2002).
Exacerbating farmers’ mental health concerns is the reluctance to seeking treatment. Farmers are hesitant to acknowledge struggles with mental health, and a negative stigma exists regarding seeking mental health treatment (Judd et al., 2006). Additionally, farm families may live in isolated geographic locations in which seeking mental health treatment is not possible, as rural communities are limited in the availability of mental health services (Gray, 2011). Because of a lack of mental health providers, rural residents tend to receive medication instead of psychotherapy (Richardson, Lewis, Casey-Goldstein, McCauley, & Katon, 2007).
Social Support as a Protective Factor

Social support increases overall health and well-being (Berkman, Glass, Brissette, & Seeman, 2000; Cohen, 2004) by serving as a buffer against the adverse effects of work demands (Logstein, 2016). Social support also serves as a protective factor against psychological distress (Caxaj, 2016; Compton, Thompson, & Kaslow, 2005; Turvey, Stromquist, Kelly, Zwerling, & Merchant, 2002); however, limited studies have examined social support as a protective factor in the development of depressive symptoms in farmers (Turvey et al., 2002). In a sample of 99 male Australian farmers, social support and a sense of belonging decreased the relationship between depressive symptoms and suicidal ideations (McLaren & Challis, 2009). Turvey et al. (2002) found similar results with a sample of rural individuals, in which lack of frequent contact with family, friends, or groups was strongly associated with suicidal ideations.
Social networks involve a social structure in which individuals engage in close personal relationships and interactions. The quality of social support offered by social networks is important to consider, as individuals with low quality of relationships may have more than double the risk of depression (Teo, Choi, & Valenstein, 2013). In addition to the quality of relationships, different sources of social support may be more beneficial than others when protecting against mental health symptoms (Smith et al., 2013). For example, trust is an important factor in determining with whom farmers will share personal matters (Roy, Tremblay, & Robertson, 2014). Farmers tend to rely upon family members, other farmers, and friends for support with mental health issues rather than professionals (Judd et al., 2006).
The majority of the research on the mental health of farmers, including suicide risk, has occurred in Australia (Scheyett, Bayakly, & Whitaker, 2019). Little knowledge exists regarding social support as a protective factor in the development of depressive symptoms in farmers and the types of social support (significant other, family, friend) that would most benefit farmers in the United States. To fill this gap, the current study addressed two research questions: (a) What is the relationship between depression and social support in U.S. farmers?; and (b) Do different types of social support relate to depression in this group?
Method

Farmers completed an online survey that included demographic questions and two measures: the Major Depression Inventory (MDI; Olsen, Jensen, Noerholm, Martiny, & Bech, 2003) and the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS; Zimet, Dahlem, Zimet, & Farley, 1988). Demographic information obtained included gender, age, marital status, number of children, race/ethnicity, military status, state of residence, length of time in occupation, and type of operation. Farmers were also asked to specify who they would reach out to if they were faced with a challenging situation (e.g., family, friend, medical provider, pastor/priest, counselor).
Participants and Procedure
The land-grant university Cooperative Extension System provides outreach services for communities across each state. Cooperative Extension personnel throughout one Midwestern state distributed information regarding the online survey through multiple methods, including e-mail distribution lists to producers and direct interactions at farming events during the summer and winter months. Farmers were required to be over the age of 18 and engage in farming or ranching at least part time to qualify for participation in the study. A $10.00 gift card incentive was provided to participants who completed the survey. The study’s protocol was reviewed and approved by all relevant institutional review boards.
Measures
The MDI (Olsen et al., 2003) is a 12-item self-report questionnaire intended to measure the presence of major depression according to the algorithm of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 4th edition; DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) and the severity of depressive symptoms, with a range of 0 to 50. The instrument inquires about depressive symptoms during the past 2 weeks and uses a Likert scale from 0 (at no time) to 5 (all the time). The MDI has adequate internal validity as a unidimensional scale, and when used as an index of diagnostic validity, has a sensitivity of 82% for DSM–IV major depression (Olsen et al., 2003). The internal consistency in the current sample was very high (α = .91).
The MSPSS (Zimet et al., 1988) is a brief 12-item self-report measure that assesses perceived social support from three subscales: Family, Friends, and Significant Other. The items are scored on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from 1 (very strongly disagree) to 7 (very strongly agree; Zimet et al., 1988). The MSPSS has demonstrated strong factorial validity and internal consistency reliability across varying groups (Canty-Mitchell & Zimet, 2000; Stanley, Beck, & Zebb, 1998; Zimet, Powell, Farley, Werkman, & Berkoff, 1990), and has strong factorial validity confirming the three subscales (Zimet et al., 1990). The internal consistency in the current sample was high for overall social support (α = .97) as well as the Significant Other (α = .95), Family (α = .94), and Friend subscales (α = .96). Overall, the MSPSS is widely used to measure perceived sources of social support (Osman, Lamis, Freedenthal, Gutierrez, & McNaughton-Cassill, 2014).
Statistical Analysis
Mean MDI and MSPSS scores were compared between men and women using an independent-samples t test, with α = .05. Due to the skewed distribution of MDI scores, a square root transformation was applied to MDI scores prior to analysis. Using bivariate linear regression, each predictor variable was initially screened for significance against MDI score. All variables that reached significance at α = .1 were then tested in a multivariate model. The initial multivariate model included military service, gender, Significant Other subscale, Family subscale, and Friend subscale. Variables that did not remain significant in the multivariate model were removed individually. Once all variables in the model were significant at α = .05, the variables that were previously removed were tested in the final model. Variance inflation factors (VIFs) were calculated for each model, and a cutoff of 5 was used with these models due to the potential for multicollinearity among support scales. However, all VIFs were below 4 and therefore did not meet the threshold of 5 that we had set for multicollinearity. Moderating effects of gender and military service on the social support subscales were tested using Gender × Subscale and Military Service × Subscale interactions. Final data are reported as beta coefficients and p values derived from square-root-transformed outcome variables.
Results

Demographic Characteristics
Participants were 172 farmers and ranchers from five Midwestern states (106 men, 65 women; one did not report their gender). Slightly more than half of participants were in middle adulthood, as 26.3% (n = 45) were between 45 and 54 years of age, and 24% (n = 41) were between 55 and 64 years of age. The majority of participants were married (n = 152, 88.4%), and 61.3% (n = 103) had children who helped on the farm or ranch. Most (n = 123, 71.5%) reported a secondary source of income off the farm, whereas 28.5% (n = 49) reported that farming or ranching was their primary source of income, with no income off of the farm.
Participants specified to whom they would reach out to if faced with a challenging situation. Most of the farmers would turn to a family member (n = 150, 87.2%) or a friend (n = 118, 68.6%) for support. A little over one third of farmers (n = 62, 36.0%) would seek out a pastor, and 19.8% (n = 34) would talk to a doctor. Only 21 farmers (12.2%) reported that they would seek support from a counselor.
Risk Factors for Depression
According to the MDI, a score between 20 to 24 indicates mild depression, a score of 25 to 29 indicates moderate depression, and a score of 30 or more indicates severe depression. Most farmers reported a score below 20 (n = 157; 91.3%), whereas 8.7% (n = 15) had scores that were in a depression range. Nine farmers scored between 20 to 24 for mild depression, three scored between 25 to 29 for moderate depression, and three reported a score greater than or equal to 30 for severe depression. There were no significant differences in the depression scores for men and women.
On the MSPSS, a mean score from 1 to 2.9 indicates low support, 3 to 5 suggests medium support, and 5.1 to 7 is considered high support. Over 76.2% of farmers and ranchers (n = 131) reported high support from significant others, 74.4% (n = 128) reported high support from family members, and 68.6% (n = 118) reported high support from friends. Overall, no significant differences existed between men and women on the subscales or total mean score for social support.
Higher scores on the MSPSS subscales and the total score were all associated with lower MDI scores. In the final model, the Friend subscale (β = 0.22, p = .02) remained significant, and the Family subscale indicated a trend toward significance (β = 0.17, p = .08). There were no significant Gender × Support interaction effects on MDI scores for significant other (p = .97), family (p = .75), and friend (p = .97). Similarly, there were no significant Military Service × Support interaction effects on MDI scores for significant other (p = .97), family (p = .97), and friend (p = .90). Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Bivariate and Multivariate Linear Regression Models Predicting Major Depression Inventory Scores
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
shows the bivariate and multivariate linear regression models predicting MDI scores.
Discussion

In this study, 8.7% of the participants reported mild, moderate, or severe depressive symptoms. Although the MDI was not used to make a clinical diagnosis, the results suggested a similar prevalence of depressive symptoms as other recent studies, in which estimates have ranged from 7.4% to 24% in Midwestern farmers (Onwuameze et al., 2013). Additionally, only 21 farmers reported a willingness to seek counseling services if struggling with a mental health concern. Farmers may tend to ignore both physical and mental health symptoms unless their work productivity is reduced (Hull, Fennell, Vallury, Jones, & Dollman, 2017). Reluctance to seeking treatment from a mental health provider may also demonstrate the pervasive mental health stigma within agriculture, lower mental health literacy, and the lack of accessibility of mental health services in rural areas. Common structural barriers to mental health care that have been reported include a shortage of mental health providers in rural areas (Fuller, Edwards, Martinez, Edwards, & Reid, 2004) and long waiting times for services (Sturm & Sherbourne, 2001).
To increase services to rural farmers, telemental health, which involves providing mental health assessment and treatment remotely, can increase access to efficacious treatments (Hilty et al., 2013). Telemental health has been found to be effective for diagnosis and assessments in adults (Hilty et al., 2013); however, more research is needed to determine the willingness of farmers to access telemental health services and the effectiveness of the care. In addition to increasing access to mental health care, mental health clinicians may also improve communication with farmers by receiving training on the context of farm life to acquire a greater understanding of the physical stressors, farm-related tasks, external factors, and interpersonal stressors farmers experience daily (Hull et al., 2017).
Farmers completed the MSPSS to measure perceived social support in three areas: family, friends, and significant other. Low social support scores on the MSPSS in the subscales as well as the total mean score were significantly related to higher depression scores on the MDI, which indicates that as social support decreases, depressive symptoms increase. Furthermore, low support from friends and family appeared to be the most significant risk factors for higher depression scores after controlling for age, gender, military service, and significant-other support.
Social support is one of the most essential functions provided by a family (Gardner & Cutrona, 2004). Family relationships within a farming context can be complex, as farming is a unique occupation in which work and home life are intertwined. Often, farming involves multiple generations living in close proximity to one another (Swisher, Elder, Lorenz, & Conger, 1998). Although this closeness offers opportunities for social support, blurred boundaries within roles, tasks, responsibilities, and expectations may exist, resulting in lack of communication and increased conflict among family members (Fraser et al., 2005).
Passing ownership of the farm from one family member to the next is one of the most pertinent issues that can create role confusion and conflict. Patrilineal inheritance is a common strategy for keeping the farm within the family (Macken-Walsh & Byrne, 2015). This strategy can be crucial for the economic performance and sustainability of the farm (Cush & Macken-Walsh, 2016). However, farmers tend to retire at a later age (Franklin, Mitchell, Driscoll, & Fragar, 2001), resulting in the male heirs becoming dependent on their parents for a longer duration than nonfarming peers. When passing ownership of the family farm is delayed, the younger generation often struggles with identity issues due to a desire to be autonomous (Fraser et al., 2005). The identity issues and role confusion may contribute to conflict and a disconnection within the parent–child relationship, possibly resulting in lower levels of perceived social support by either family member.
In addition to blurred boundaries with family roles and expectations, family communication patterns can influence the method in which one seeks social support. By observing interactions among family members, communication patterns are learned and applied within relationships (Koerner & Cvancara, 2002). Communication patterns related to seeking social support can be direct or indirect. Direct support seeking involves an explicit desire and request for help, including discussing problems and/or feelings while openly displaying one’s emotions (Barbee & Cunningham, 1995). Conversely, indirect support seeking involves minimizing feelings or issues, avoiding specific topics, and trying to hide distress (Goldsmith, 1995). Indirect requests for social support may result in a lack of awareness by the receiver that support is desired. As a result, the receiver is perceived as unaccepting of the request for help. Indirect support seeking, such as lack of openness and topic avoidance, has been associated with less satisfaction and increased distress in relationships (Sargent, 2002). Because of the limited empirical work on help-seeking perceptions and behaviors among farmers (Roy et al., 2014), future research may explore the communication patterns (direct or indirect) for seeking social support within farm families.
Communication patterns are also important when establishing and sustaining friendships. Farmers with low friend support may lack the resources to initiate relationships or connect with friends. Strong interpersonal skills are important when establishing networks of social support. Individuals with strong communication skills tend to report increased feelings of happiness and higher levels of self-esteem (Demir, Jaafar, Bilyk, & Mohd Ariff, 2012). Conversely, individuals with poor social skills are at a higher risk of developing psychological distress, because they lack the protective effects of social support (Segrin, McNelis, & Swiatkowski, 2016). Perhaps the farmers who lack social support may be limited in the interpersonal skills necessary to initiate and maintain relationships, which contributes to symptoms of depression. Future research may explore the interpersonal communication styles of farmers and how those styles relate to developing social relationships.
Finally, agrarian beliefs influence communication styles and help-seeking behaviors in farm families. The agrarian way of life typically involves pride, physical strength, heavy labor, ruggedness, and self-sacrifice (Bryant & Garnham, 2015). Societal norms on masculinity, such as the avoidance of showing emotion and/or vulnerability, the importance of autonomy, and the ability to take risks contribute to negative attitudes and beliefs toward seeking help from others (Hogan, Scarr, Lockie, Chant, & Alston, 2012). With the social norms of rural masculinity, seeking help may be viewed as unmanly (Roy et al., 2014), which may hinder farmers from discussing and responding to emotional concerns with friends or family members. The lack of openness to discuss problems may limit the opportunities to seek and receive social support.
Limitations
Because the current study used self-report measures, a response bias may have been present. Social desirability refers to the tendency to report symptoms in a favorable manner to gain social approval (King & Bruner, 2000). This tendency is more likely to occur with questions that are socially sensitive, such as mental health questionnaires or interviews (King & Bruner, 2000; Phillips & Clancy, 1970). The depression rate in the current sample was similar to reported rates in the literature; however, symptoms may have been underreported. A social desirability scale may be helpful in future surveys to control for this form of response bias.
Farmers were recruited to participate in the study via Cooperative Extension e-mail list serves and farming events, which may limit the generalizability of the results. Considering that Cooperative Extension personnel shared the survey with farmers, the level of perceived social support may have been higher due to an affiliation with Cooperative Extension programming. Additionally, because the current study did not utilize random sampling procedures, representation of the larger farming population may not have been achieved. Future studies employing random sampling procedures would strengthen the methodology by eliminating sampling bias and ensuring the sample represents the target population. Finally, the study used a cross-sectional design and, as such, no cause–effect inferences can be made.
Implications
The current study contributes to a greater understanding of the role of social support as a protective factor on depressive symptoms in farmers in the United States. The results highlight the importance of friend and family support and the need to explore family dynamics (e.g., roles, rules, boundaries, expectations) and communication patterns unique to farm families that may contribute to resiliency and protect against depressive symptoms. Additionally, efforts to increase mental health literacy may reduce stigma and improve help-seeking behaviors.
Considering farmers tend to disclose to individuals they trust, it is important for mental health providers to understand the context of farming and the stressors that occur within the occupation. By attending training or professional development opportunities, mental health professionals would acquire a better understanding of farm stress that could enhance rapport. Additionally, due to time constraints in farming and the structural barriers related to accessing mental health care in rural areas, traditional face-to-face counseling may not be practical. Telemental health may provide an alternative approach to reaching farmers who are live in remote locations.",
"39": "Meeting the mental health needs of our current veteran population is one of the primary challenges facing the Veteran’s Health Administration (VHA). The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan increased the need for mental health providers trained to deliver evidence-based treatments to veterans diagnosed with a range of mental health issues including posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), mood disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders (Seal, Bertenthal, Miner, Sen, & Marmar, 2007). Additionally, the VHA also serves a significantly older veteran population that requires care for both preexisting mental health issues as well as new conditions associated with chronic health stressors and/or cognitive decline. Between 2001 and 2014, the proportion of veterans with mental health conditions or substance use disorders who utilize VHA services increased from 27% to 41% (United States Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention [OMHSP], 2017).
A barrier to meeting the mental health needs of veterans lies in a geographic misalignment between the location of mental health providers and where many veterans reside. Less than 10% of psychologists live in rural areas (United States Department of Health and Human Services, National Center for Health Workforce [NCHW], 2014). In contrast, 23% of all veterans reside in rural areas (United States Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Rural Health [ORH], 2015). This lack of providers (which impacts recruitment of qualified mental health providers in rural VHA facilities), in addition to high provider turnover, as well as the burden of traveling long distances to VHA facilities may contribute to rural veterans’ limited access to mental health care. Telemental health (TMH) services are increasingly recognized as a way to address regional disparities in mental health care availability and to bridge the geographic gap between mental health providers and the veterans who need these mental health services (Deen, Godleski, & Fortney, 2012).
Defined as the provision of mental health care from a distance, TMH grew out of a need to provide high quality, affordable, mental health care to patients living where access to such services was limited (Grady et al., 2011). While TMH service providers can utilize a variety of mediums (e.g., telephone, clinical video telehealth (CVT), Internet), there has been a growing body of literature that has explored the delivery of mental health services via synchronous CVT. Evidence suggests that a wide variety of treatments for a range of diagnoses (e.g., PTSD, insomnia, depression, anger, anxiety) can be effectively administered via TMH, with efficacy comparable to that of in-person treatment (Bouchard et al., 2004; Gros et al., 2013; Hilty et al., 2013). Similar findings regarding the effectiveness of treatment delivery via TMH have been found with veteran samples (Fortney et al., 2007; Gehrman, Shah, Miles, Kuna, & Godleski, 2016; Gros, Yoder, Tuerk, Lozano, & Acierno, 2011; Morland, Greene, Rosen, Mauldin, & Frueh, 2009; Morland et al., 2010). Over the past 15 years, in response to the mental health needs of veterans in rural areas, TMH has become increasingly utilized in VHA (Deen et al., 2012; Godleski, Darkins, & Peters, 2012; Wallace, Weeks, Wang, Lee, & Kazis, 2006; Weeks et al., 2004). VHA providers deliver TMH interventions via the VHA’s secure real-time, interactive clinical videoconferencing systems, which provide high definition, two-way communication between providers and veterans. The system is Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 140–2 compliant and part of a larger data management protocol that is HIPAA compliant.
VHA TMH Hub Initiative

The VHA TMH Hub initiative began in 2002 with the inception of a national clinical leadership group consisting of regional representatives and the Veterans Affairs (VA) National Offices of Telehealth and Mental Health Services (Godleski, 2014). The goal of the initiative was to leverage changes in technology-facilitated care by developing a model in which a facility “hub” could expand mental health resources to remote “spoke” clinics and veterans’ residences. In 2010, VHA established the National Telemental Health Center (NTMHC) to oversee and coordinate national TMH activity, with the continued purpose of connecting veterans to mental health experts, regardless of veteran residence (Godleski, 2014). The NTMHC clinicians provide expertise in the treatment of affective, psychotic, anxiety and substance use disorders and operate out of the VA Boston, VA Connecticut Health care System, Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center (VAMC), and Providence VAMC (United States Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of Connected Care [OCC], 2018).
VHA TMH services are provided through multiple treatment modalities, including individual, group, couples and family psychotherapies, as well as medication management (Deen et al., 2012). Additionally, VHA TMH services are available to multiple sites, including VHA Medical Centers, VHA community-based outpatient clinics (CBOCs), residential treatment facilities, student health centers, homeless shelters and veterans’ residences (Godleski, 2014). Since 2002, VHA has provided more than 2.7 million TMH health encounters with service delivery increasing over time. In 2017, more than 151,600 veterans received TMH services. While most of the services were delivered at CBOCs, approximately 8,700 veterans received mental health services in their homes, representing a significant additional expansion of access particularly critical in rural areas (OCC, 2018).
VA New York Harbor Health care System—Manhattan (VA NYH) – with its track record of providing tele-psychiatry services, density of mental health providers in the New York City area, range of clinical expertise among its staff, and established infrastructure for training and research—was selected by the VHA Office of Rural Health (VHA ORH) to serve as a “Hub” for TMH service delivery and was provided with resources to add psychology services to the facility’s existing TMH psychiatry services. Our current paper describes the implementation of TMH psychology services at the VA NYH TMH Hub in New York City. We describe the rationale for TMH services, the VA NYH TMH Hub’s mission, and future directions for our program.
The VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology Service

The VA NYH TMH Hub was one of six programs funded by the VHA ORH in September 2016 as part of an expansion of the original Hub initiative. In addition to increasing veteran access to mental health services, the mission of the VA NYH TMH Hub also includes providing training to students and other VHA clinicians in the delivery of TMH and conducting program evaluation as well as research to advance knowledge and promote innovation in TMH services.
VA NYH TMH providers use Cisco DX80 devices or Logitech webcams to administer TMH treatment. The DX80 devices are 23-in. liquid crystal display monitors with a 1920 × 1080 resolution. The Logitech webcams are connected to Dell personal computers with 19-in. light emitting diode monitors that have 1440 × 900 resolution. Providers use Cisco Jabber software to provide treatment to veterans seen at CBOCs, VHA medical centers, or on a VHA-issued tablet at home. For veterans seen at home via their personal computers, providers used Virtual Medical Room (VMR) software. CVT connection is made through the VHA telehealth infrastructure, and data are transmitted at a speed of 100mb and encrypted per (FIPS) data-encryption guidelines.
Services
The VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology Service utilizes a “network” model in which any provider has the capacity to deliver services to any of our spoke sites or to the homes of veterans receiving services at our spoke sites. As areas of expertise vary across individual providers, this model maximizes the breadth of services available to veterans at any spoke facility. The current range of evidence-based psychotherapy treatments being offered by clinicians of the VA NYH TMH Hub via CVT is shown in Table 1.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. “Menu” of Mental Health Services Offered by VA NYH TMH Hub
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Additionally, our program is working to develop and adapt a range of new services for TMH delivery. For example, neuropsychological testing is also being offered as a service by the VA NYH TMH Hub based on a review of the literature on feasibility, reliability, validity, and practice recommendations for teleneuropsychology, as well as consultation with VHA neuropsychologists with experience in this domain (Cullum, Hynan, Grosch, Parikh, & Weiner, 2014; Cullum, Weiner, Gehrmann, & Hynan, 2006; Galusha-Glasscock, Horton, Weiner, & Cullum, 2016; Grosch, Gottlieb, & Cullum, 2011; Grosch, Weiner, Hynan, Shore, & Cullum, 2015; Harrell, Wilkins, Connor, & Chodosh, 2014). Group psychotherapies, such as CBT Skills, DBT Drop in Distress Tolerance, CPT, and CBT-I, are also being offered to maximize veteran access to these psychological services. Our providers also collaborate with spoke site clinicians and interdisciplinary teams, as well as with TMH psychiatrists regarding shared patients within our program.
Training
In pursuing the Hub’s training mission, we are integrating of TMH into the existing Psychology training programs at VA NYH. Currently the Psychology Service coordinates predoctoral externship, internship, as well as postdoctoral fellowship programs in Health Psychology, Geropsychology, and PTSD. In total, 20 psychology trainees rotate through the VA NYH Manhattan Campus each year. We have developed didactic materials for trainees on the delivery of TMH and piloted the delivery of CBT-I via TMH as part of the psychology externship. We anticipate offering TMH training to all existing Psychology training programs at VA NYH within the next three years.
Quality Improvement
As a new program, we gather quality improvement (QI) data to allow us to identify problems and adjust processes quickly. Embedding QI protocols within our TMH Hub is critical to better understand the effectiveness of our services and for their continued development, sustainability, and future growth. We describe our QI protocols to veterans during initial orientation sessions to TMH and make clear that their participation in these efforts is voluntary and does not impact the care they receive. Moreover, veterans are made aware that any QI data is de-identified and cannot be linked to any personally identifying health information. Similarly, we inform staff that their participation in our QI efforts is voluntary and their participation or decision not to participate has no bearing on their employment. All TMH Hub staff have been integral in developing the QI protocols and participate voluntarily.
Research
We make a clear distinction between QI activities and research activities as guided by our human subjects committee, as QI activities are not conducted to produce generalizable knowledge or necessarily for publication purposes. Given the constantly evolving technologies and the expanding range of interventions offered through TMH, continuing research is critical for evaluating the effectiveness of TMH and its application to a complex veteran population that often presents with co-occurring conditions. Moreover, this modality provides tremendous opportunity for further innovation. All ongoing TMH research protocols have been approved by the VA NYH Institutional Review Board (IRB) and either informed consent is obtained by study participants or we obtained a waiver of informed consent when appropriate (e.g., studies involving a chart review of standard care).
Implementation

Following the award of funding by the VHA ORH TMH Hub Initiative, the first five months of the program focused on staffing, establishing partnerships with spoke sites, evaluating the needs and resources available at each site, and planning the logistics for a rollout of clinical services. Five psychologists were hired to staff the VA NYH TMH Hub. Four out of five were external hires and all were hired to dedicate 100% of their time to the program. Initially, plans were established to rollout services to four VAMC spoke sites (Albany, Bath, Canandaigua, and Iowa) that had expressed interested in receiving TMH services once the program was announced within the local Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN). Each VAMC identified programs and CBOCs that (a) needed additional mental health services, and (b had with the space and technical support resources required to receive TMH services (see Table 2).
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. VA NYH TMH Hub Spoke Sites
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
We initially scheduled weekly calls between VA NYH TMH Hub staff, spoke site leadership, clinical and technical staff to establish services. The frequency of the meetings decreased as we finalized logistics and adequately addressed barriers to implementation. One staff member served as a primary point of contact (POC) for each spoke. The POC allowed hub and spoke sites to efficiently communicate and address emergent issues. A standing weekly VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology Staff meeting was held to address logistical issues across sites. Additionally, a standing weekly VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology Staff Peer Supervision/Case Conference was held to address clinical issues that arose and to discuss the unique aspects of delivering services via TMH.
Within five months of beginning to offer mental health interventions, the service reached its preestablished productivity goals of 80 veteran encounters per month, per provider for the first year. In response to the demand from spoke sites for additional services, in October 2017 VHA ORH provided the VA NYH TMH Hub with additional funding to expand the psychology staff by two additional full-time psychologists. New staff were recruited and on staff with the program in January 2018. Our most recent productivity data (third quarter of Fiscal Year 2018) showed mean work relative value units (wRVU) of 395.6 and median wRVU of 440.5. The work relative value unit is a measure of specialty provider productivity utilized by VHA to provide guidance on the staffing of specialty services.
Standard Operating Procedures
TMH Hub staff psychologists developed emergency procedures, initial intake evaluation templates, and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for: (1) initiating services with spoke sites, dual-site documentation, tracking routine clinical screening measures, scheduling patients, and delivering CVT-to-Home services. Through iterative collaboration, the team also developed an intake protocol and template to ensure a comprehensive and uniform initial evaluation that captures relevant clinical and TMH information (more details below).
We also established detailed risk procedures in collaboration with suicide prevention coordinators and clinical staff at each site prior to the delivery of services. These included on- and off-site contacts and contingency plans for possible risk scenarios including safety concerns related to veteran risk to self or others, medical emergencies, and problems with technology. For each scenario, staff developed a decision tree with contact information (on-site staff members as well as local police precinct and hospital information) and preferred method of contact (i.e., phone number(s), instant messaging, e-mail, etc.). Additionally, staff established specific procedures for responding to a group therapy participant’s endorsement of suicidal ideation on the PHQ-9. We also solicited feedback from the consultation service of the VA Rocky Mountain Mental Illness Research Education Clinical Centers of Excellence (MIRECC) for Veteran Suicide Prevention on our risk protocols.
We developed all protocols through preliminary brainstorming in VA NYH TMH Hub Psychology staff meetings. Individual staff members then volunteered to take primary responsibility for outlining the ideas discussed, which were then reviewed and edited by all team members. Upon consensus, procedure and intake documents were saved in a shared electronic folder to which all team members have access. As staff piloted these procedures, feedback was obtained during staff and peer supervision meetings, which allowed the protocols to continue to evolve in response to staff and clinical needs.
Referral Process
Spoke site clinicians refer veterans for TMH therapy and assessment services through an interfacility consult. Information in the consult includes: reason for referral, diagnosis, relevant stressors, risk factors, and referring provider’s contact information. Psychologists receive consults and screen veterans via chart review for appropriateness for our program (e.g., level of risk, clinical presentations or physical limitations that would interfere with delivery of treatment) and then assign veterans to a clinician based on the psychologists’ clinical specialties and availability. Prior to intake, psychologists attempt to contact veterans by phone to provide a brief introduction to TMH services. Psychologists use an initial intake template to assess the appropriateness of the referral and collaboratively develop the initial treatment goals and plan.
Preliminary Access to Services (as of January 31, 2018)
From March 2017 to January 2018, the VA NYH TMH Hub received 377 consults for TMH psychology services. Of those consults received, 252 veterans engaged in TMH services through our Hub. We provided individual psychotherapy to 65 veterans, group psychotherapy to 193 veterans, and couples therapy to 7 veteran couples. Additionally, we provided 9 PTSD evaluations and 18 cognitive evaluations.
The demographic characteristics, clinical presentation of the veterans seen via CVT, and services provided by the VA NYH TMH Hub are shown in Tables 3
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Characteristics of Veterans Seen Through NYH TMH Hub for All Services
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
and 4.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Services Provided by NYH TMH Hub
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Given that many veterans present with multiple complex problems, many veterans seen through the program receive more than one intervention over the course of their treatment and intervention protocols frequently require adaptation to the veteran’s individual presentation.
Overall, 32% of patients referred to the program were not ultimately seen for treatment by VA NYH TMH Hub psychology staff. Reasons included: veterans’ lack of response to outreach, inability to commit to demands of treatment, lack of availability during provider appointment times, lack of interest or indication that services were no longer needed, or discharged from the facility prior to services offered. Additionally, veterans were also not seen due to incorrect consult submissions, inappropriate referrals due to risk management issues, and services requested not being offered through the Hub. Data on the characteristics of veterans seen through the program and those not seen for individual and couples treatment are shown in Table 5.
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 5. Characteristics of Veterans Referred for Individual and Couples Treatments
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
Overall, the characteristics of veterans seen and not seen by the program were similar, with the exception of age, veterans referred to the program but not seen tended to be younger than the population of veterans seen.
Our data was consistent with other findings indicating that psychotherapy delivered by TMH was well tolerated (Bouchard et al., 2004; Fortney et al., 2007; Gehrman et al., 2016; Gros et al., 2013; Gros et al., 2011; Morland et al., 2009; Morland et al., 2010). Overall, only 16.9% of patients who initiated individual or couples’ psychotherapy dropped out of treatment. The average number of sessions attended for individual treatment among those who have completed treatment was 12.0. Among those in active individual treatment as of January 2018, the mean number of sessions attended was 15.0. Among those actively receiving couples’ treatment, the mean number of sessions attended was 12.5.
Given the uncertainty regarding timing of discharge from the domiciliary program where the VA NYH TMH Hub’s psychotherapy groups have been implemented, most groups have been designed as drop-in skills groups. This format is designed so skills taught in each session do not require background from prior sessions. Each individual session is thus able to “stand alone,” which provides the greatest flexibility in the timing for veteran entry into the groups. The mean number of group session attended by veterans ranged from 2.9 to 3.8 varying by group.
Quality Improvement
The program is engaged in ongoing quality improvement efforts. To facilitate these efforts, as part of the program’s protocols for routine clinical care, we implemented standardized assessments and developed a standardized intake to ensure consistent collection of clinical information (see Appendix A). The intake includes an interview where demographic information, military history, medical history, functional capacity, pain, social history, psychiatric history, and substance use history are collected. Depression and anxiety are measured weekly with the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 and other measures are utilized when relevant to the veteran’s treatment goals (e.g., PCL-5 for PTSD, YBOCS for OCD). Staff at the spoke site administer measures to veterans at the time of their arrival for their appointment and then send the measures via fax or encrypted e-mail to psychologists at the VA NYH TMH Hub. We plan to analyze and review this data quarterly to track treatment quality.
We also established procedures to evaluate the experience of a) veterans receiving TMH services, (b) VA NYH TMH Hub psychologists, and (c) spoke site leadership, technical support, and the clinical staff who refer patients to VA NYH TMH Hub psychology services. All participants from whom we gather QI data are informed that their participation is entirely voluntary and will not impact the care they receive or their employment status. Following the final therapy session, patients complete an 8-item measure of satisfaction (Consumer Satisfaction Questionnaire) and a 10-item measure of factors specific to TMH treatment (e.g., experience with technological difficulties, privacy concerns, veteran’s other options for psychotherapy, and why they selected TMH over other available options). Following a literature review of patient satisfaction measures, program psychologists were unable to find an existing measure that assessed the specific domains of interest to our program (i.e., specific factors related to veterans’ selection of TMH and issues that may have negatively impacted their TMH experience). We collaboratively developed a 10-item measure designed to help the program better understand veterans’ experience with our services and identify potential systematic issues that could be addressed to improve the delivery of services (see Appendix B). Veterans who receive individual psychotherapy also complete a 20-min qualitative telephone interview about their experiences using TMH, which is conducted by staff specifically trained to carry out these procedures within one month of treatment completion. The interview asks about aspects of TMH that patients found useful as well as areas for improvement, perceived impact of TMH on the therapy relationship, and patients’ satisfaction with technology, privacy, and access. Patients who prematurely drop out of treatment are also contacted via telephone and given the option to complete this interview. As an additional aspect of our QI protocols, staff also record and transcribe the interviews, but only with written consent from veterans in accordance with VA policy. Interviews for veterans receiving other services are currently being developed.
We also gather quality improvement data on VA NYH TMH Hub psychologists and staff at the spoke site. TMH psychologists meet weekly for peer supervision to discuss complex cases, observations about providing services via TMH, and personal reactions to providing clinical care via TMH. The content of these meetings is maintained for future analysis to direct further innovation in the NYH TMH Hub. Additionally, we collect information on the experiences of referring providers and spoke site leadership focused on satisfaction with the delivery of TMH services for further quality improvement. Referring providers include spoke site clinical staff from a variety of disciplines, including psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nurse practitioners, registered dietitians, and primary care physicians. We are also interested in the experiences of Telehealth Clinical Technicians (TCTs), who assist in the delivery of TMH at the remote site. Their responsibilities include bringing patients to clinical rooms at their appointment times, connecting the patients with their service provider via CVT, transmitting copies of clinical measures and psychotherapy materials (e.g., handouts, homework) between patient and service provider, and assisting with scheduling TMH appointments. We plan to conduct similar experience surveys with TCTs as described above.
Current Research
Additionally, the VA NYH TMH Hub is pursuing a research mission with two primary objectives: (a) evaluation of factors that impact structure, process, and treatment outcome, and (b) development and evaluation of new practices. As part of our efforts to advance the first aim, we have an IRB approved protocol to conduct a chart review examining the quality of care provided through the TMH Hub with a goal of identifying factors that influence the effectiveness of TMH services. Toward the second aim, the Clinical Co-Director of the VA NYH TMH Hub serves as Principal Investigator (PI) on an IRB approved, VA Health Services Research and Development (HSR&D) funded pilot study to develop a TMH-based assessment and family intervention for family caregivers of individuals with dementia. VA NYH TMH Hub staff are providing input on the development of the assessment and intervention.
Future Directions
Aligning with its three areas of focus, the Hub will seek to continue to develop and pursue its clinical, training, and research missions. Clinically, the development of more rapid systems that can provide information to leadership as well as feedback to individual clinicians on productivity, patient outcome, and progress could allow both the program and individual providers to adjust practices rapidly and improve the quality of services and care. Additionally, program staff are internally developing protocols to track clinical data in ways that will alert providers to patients who are not progressing as expected. Clinicians will discuss these patients at peer supervision meetings to determine potential modifications to their treatment plans.
We seek to eventually expand the training mission of the Hub beyond providing supervision and seminars to trainees who are onsite at the VA NYH. Ultimately, the training program will seek to develop curriculum for delivery of TMH services for specific patient populations that integrates with the VHA’s continuing education systems and could provide distance learning to anyone interested in developing skills in the delivery of TMH services.
Finally, in addition to the NYH TMH Hub’s engagement in quality improvement, the VHA’s TMH Hub initiative is ripe for addressing a vast range of research questions. TMH’s implementation within the VHA health care system provides opportunities for examining differences in structure, process, and outcome in a systematic way. We plan to collaborate with other VHA TMH programs to pursue research funding to study the impact of structural factors that form the context of care including equipment, setting (e.g., facility to facility, facility to home, facility to another location such as a veteran’s workplace via use of VHA tablets or video apps, etc.), human resources, scheduling, and organizational characteristics on patient and system outcomes. We hope to go beyond the question of “does it work?” and ask questions that evaluate who most benefits from TMH services, at what time in treatment, delivered by which providers, and in what types of settings.",
"40": "Mental and behavioral health problems are increasingly being recognized as global concerns. The National Institute of Mental Health (2015) estimates that 1 in 10 people worldwide has a mental health disorder, and 1 in 4 families has at least one family member with a diagnosable mental health concern (World Health Organization [WHO], 2013a). Mental health has now surpassed all other disease categories to become the leading cause of disability worldwide (Whiteford et al., 2013).
There are huge disparities in both mental health and access to mental health care worldwide. For example, the disparity between Brazil and the United States is quite large, even though Brazil has an emerging economy and a comprehensive health policy initiative that includes mental health. In Brazil, severe mental health problems account for 21.5% of all disability-adjusted life years, whereas in the United States, this figure is 13.6% (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 2013; Schramm et al., 2004).
While many could intuit that there are disparities between high-, middle-, and low-income countries, less obvious is that huge disparities exist even within countries. These disparities are often most prominent between urban and rural areas (Smalley et al., 2010). For example, using the metric of number of psychiatrists per 100,000, the most commonly used metric for determining access to mental health care, the United States ranks 14th of 186 countries in access to care (WHO, 2015). Yet, there are rural and urban areas of the United States that mirror middle- and low-income countries in access to mental health care.
Whether attempting to address disparities within a country or around the world, the most common approach has characteristics of imperialism; models that have been developed in well-resourced urban areas (typically in high-income countries) have been applied carte blanche to underserved areas without consideration or respect for the local ways of help seeking and helping. Most of these attempts have been met with limited success or have failed outright. The most likely reason for this is that traditional models of mental health care do not take into account the preferred methods of help seeking and helping in these communities. These attempts have failed to recognize the unique culture in these communities (Bischoff, Springer, & Taylor, 2017), the role of stigma in help seeking and helping, and the role of community engagement and buy-in at all levels of decision making. If we are to have a comprehensive, coordinated approach to mental health care, as the World Health Assembly has called for (WHO, 2013b), it must be one that is adaptable to local mores around help seeking and helping.
Rural Proofing

Rural proofing is an approach used across multiple disciplines, including health care, to ensure that policies, practice guidelines, strategies, and techniques can be applied to rural populations with approximately equal benefit as what would be obtained in urban areas (Swindlehurst, Deaville, Wynn-Jones, & Mitchinson, 2005). It is a way of ensuring that policies or strategies developed in urban areas, with urban populations in mind, are of equal quality when applied in rural areas. Rural proofing has been successfully used in Finland, England, Canada, and the United States in the areas of agriculture and health care (National Rural Health Association, 2015; Rural Health Advocacy Project, 2015).
While we did not call it rural proofing at the time, we did this when we developed our approach to reducing mental health disparities in rural communities in the United States (Bischoff et al., 2017). We recognized, through trial and error, that the traditional model of mental health care was met with skepticism and limited success in the rural communities where we were working. We, like others, failed to “think rural” (Swindlehurst et al., 2005). It was not until we engaged those who are in the local formal and informal helping network that we, in partnership with them, were able to generate unique solutions that would utilize local capacities and build on existing resources to make a difference in mental health disparities.
We began by setting aside our preconceived notions about what solutions to mental health disparities would look like. Recognizing the centrality of medical professionals to the formal helping network in rural communities, we first approached local primary care providers (PCPs) with an inquiry about the extent to which they saw mental health as a problem in the community and the degree to which they would like some help in addressing it.
Rather than offering to provide mental health care, we proposed organizing a meeting with those who play a role, either formally or informally, in addressing mental or behavioral health problems in the community. The PCPs extended invitations to a meeting about community mental and behavioral health needs. Attending the meeting were PCPs, mental health providers, law enforcement personnel, school counselors, ecclesiastical leaders, and others. We also asked PCPs to nominate mental health patients or family members of patients to attend that could be advocates for the patients’ perspectives. We led this group in a discussion about the extent to which mental and behavioral health is a problem in their community and what resources they currently have to address it. In this process, we worked with them in developing local solutions to mental health that would work within their community.
As a result, we developed a model of delivery that capitalizes on the role primary care plays in rural communities and results in a medical provider–mental health provider collaboration to improve mental health disparities. While this model has elements of urban health care, it is flexible and adaptable to each unique rural community and calls upon patients, families, and communities in considering the solutions to their health care delivery needs. Our model includes collaborative care, telemental health, and local solutions that are unique to the community in which we are working. More important, however, is the scaffolding that facilitates transferability of the model to other communities: (a) coordinating local resources, (b) expanding community capacity to develop local solutions, (c) having an intervention portfolio that includes conventional and unconventional strategies, (d) delivering interventions in unconventional settings, and (e) ensuring that practices are family centered (Bischoff et al., 2017). This framework is particularly attractive for proofing because it is culturally sensitive and adaptable to the unique needs of the community.
Global Proofing

The concept of rural proofing extends to the global environment. Just because a strategy works in one country does not mean that it can be applied with equal quality or effectiveness in another. This is especially the case for countries that do not have the same resource structure, ideology about professional helpers, and patterns of help seeking as the country in which the strategy was developed. This also applies to mental health policies. Both strategies and policies must be adaptable to the local environment. Accommodations must be made that allow for local solutions to be generated that build on existing strengths and available resources and that respect cultural tradition and mores related to help seeking and helping. In global proofing, strategies are assessed for appropriateness in light of country context, and they are modified and tested at scale before being adopted as a local solution. Our framework is particularly useful for global proofing mental health care solutions. It builds community capacity to generate local solutions, honors existing help-seeking and helping networks, and is inherently collaborative and family focused. We are using this framework with success in global proofing our collaborative care telemental health model in Brazil.
The Point of Entry for Global Mental Health: Primary Care

Addressing mental health disparities around the world cannot be considered independently from primary care (World Organization of National Colleges, 2014). This is especially true in rural areas around the world. In the United States, PCPs in both urban and rural areas have long been considered the de facto mental health care providers (Regier, Goldberg, & Taube, 1978). While there is a diversity of formal and informal helping networks globally, each of which could be considered a point of entry for mental health, common across all country contexts is the primary care medical provider network. According to the World Organization of National Colleges (2014), it is through primary care that we can best optimize health and mental health outcomes in rural areas of developing countries. It helps that PCPs typically live in the communities where they work. They “think rural” and are advocates for their communities. Also, primary care clinics typically have sufficient resources, infrastructure, and credibility to make a difference in mental health disparities. Integrating mental health care in some form with primary care is the most viable way of closing the treatment gap and ensuring that people get the mental health care that they need (WHO, 2008). PCPs in rural, remote, and isolated areas are inherently collaborative. This is in part the result of necessity; a scarcity of time and resources requires providers to collaborate in order to achieve desired outcomes.
The Importance of Family-Focused Interventions to Global Mental Health

Families are often neglected in the conversation of global mental health. It is estimated that one in four families worldwide have a family member with a mental health problem that requires treatment (World Health Organization, 2013a). When professional resources are not available, families are responsible for care (Chan, 2011). Family member caregivers are often unable to work, which increases the risk of poverty, social isolation, and vulnerability to mental illness (Mavundla, Toth, & Mphelane, 2009; Seloilwe, 2006). Family members living with and caring for family members with a mental health condition also report experiencing emotional, cognitive, and relational distress (Novello, Stain, Lyle, & Kelly, 2011). Including families in treatment makes it more likely that changes will be sustained.
A paradigm shift is needed in global mental health so that family is prioritized in treatment recommendations. Families not only need to be integrated into treatment, but interventions also need to be adaptable to meet family needs. For example, interventions that are delivered in close proximity to the family residence allow family members to maintain daily activities and reduce economic burdens. However, this might mean that unconventional treatments need to be delivered in unconventional settings. Providers that practice using family systems approaches to treatment may be particularly helpful in advancing global mental health strategies that are culturally sensitive and responsive to patient needs and preferences (Bischoff et al., 2017; Patterson, Edwards, & Vakili, 2017).
Global Proofing in Brazil

The political, economic, social, and care environment in Brazil makes this an ideal place to proof this model on a global scale. Brazil, as a middle-income emerging economy country, has similarities to the United States that make it a good choice for applying strategies developed in the United States. It also has similarities with many other middle- and some low-income countries that make it a good choice for global proofing these strategies.
In order to improve health conditions, the Brazilian government has been promoting significant changes in health care policy. These progressive initiatives include investing in both primary care and mental health care, as well as remodeling practice standards to emphasize integrated care. Policies are in place, and others are being proposed, that are based on the premise that the burden of mental disorders can be reduced by integrating mental health into primary care, particularly in places with high levels of inequality and socioeconomic deprivation, such as rural communities. Through the Family Health Strategy, 30,000 family health teams (including medical and mental health professionals) cover 95% of Brazil’s municipalities and more than 50% of the population.
Governing bodies in Brazil are having national conversations about the ethics and adequacy of mental health treatment delivered through distance technologies. Currently, the Federal Counsel of Medicine prohibits virtual medical consultations (Brasil, Conselho Federal de Medicina, 2011). The Federal Counsel of Psychologists has recently allowed psychotherapists to deliver up to 20 treatment sessions through distance technologies per patient (Brasil, Conselho Federal de Psicologia, 2012). Consequently, proofing the application of our model in Brazil will have significant implications for mental health policies throughout the country.
A Family-Based, Collaborative Care Telemental Health Solution

Our intervention model is an application of collaborative care that emphasizes treatment of the family. The primary treatment delivery medium is telemental (videoconferencing) in primary care medical clinics (a conventional setting for treatment delivery). However, the model is adaptable and flexible so that it can be applied in unconventional settings as well (e.g., the home). This model is being implemented in Santa Maria do Herval, a remote community of about 6,000 inhabitants in the mountainous region in southern Brazil. This community was identified because of the high rates of mental health (e.g., depression and suicide) and substance use problems (e.g., alcoholism). Similar to other rural underserved communities, they had challenges accessing adequate mental health care; the nearest mental health clinic was several hours away. Without mental health services in the community, the PCPs were overburdened with demands to address mental health–related problems. On learning about the U.S. team’s work in rural communities to reduce disparities, the PCP of Santa Maria do Herval asked about applying the model in their community.
After evaluating national policies and treatment guidelines for their appropriateness to rural communities in Brazil, we used our framework to coordinate local resources. The national policies directing the integration of medical and mental health care facilitated this step. Like the United States, PCPs play a central role in health and well-being in Brazil. It is common for PCPs to be among the first contacted for help with physical symptoms related to a wide variety of maladies, including complaints that have mental and behavioral health-related characteristics. Consequently, we gave particular attention to understanding the care culture of the community, with the local medical clinic as the organizing feature of that care culture. While one PCP was the champion of reducing mental health disparities, conversations were held with all the medical team to determine willingness to engage in building a solution to address it. These conversations with local PCPs helped us to gain their trust, helped them to see that they could be part of a solution, and laid the groundwork for integrating mental health services into the existing primary care system.
Conversations with PCPs also helped to expand community capacity to generate local solutions. Our telemental health collaborative care approach has been developed and refined in rural communities in the United States. It is an approach that works. However, our previous experiences have taught us that simply “dropping” a model into the community would not lead to success. The gatekeepers to care, in this case the PCPs, must buy into the approach by being able to see it as fitting within the existing care culture. This means that they must be able to make it their own by modifying the approach to adapt to the local environment.
In Brazil, cultural emphasis placed on relationships influences how medical and mental health care is provided. PCPs are more involved in treatment provided by a mental health provider than one might expect to see in the United States. For example, in our experience of collaborative care in the United States, the collaborating PCPs rarely attend mental health treatment sessions. In Brazil, our PCPs expected that they would attend at least the first and last mental health treatment sessions. Our local providers reasoned that participating in the first session would demonstrate confidence in the mental health provider and facilitate collaboration and continuity of care.
Also, because of the cultural priority given to relationships, local providers felt that including families in treatment would be critical for treatment success. The PCPs would not have been supportive if treatment was not family therapy. PCPs in this community will often see family members with their patients. It is how treatment is delivered. It is part of the care culture, as it is in many other places in Brazil. Consequently, while all our therapists are credentialed psychologists, they have received additional training in systemic models of marriage and family therapy at the Instituto da Familia, the oldest and most respected family therapy institute in Brazil. To ensure consistency, each of the therapists is supervised by the founding professor of the institute, who was trained by Salvador Minuchin and other early leaders of marriage and family therapy. This results in a congruence in a systemic approach to treatment between the PCP, therapist, and therapy supervisor.
Telemental health is an unconventional strategy in Brazil. As stated previously, national policies prohibit the use of telehealth and limit the use of telemental health. Policy makers are skeptical of its utility and are awaiting results demonstrating its effectiveness. Consequently, telemental health is rarely used in Brazil. Our protocol includes a combination of telemental health and face-to-face treatment sessions, complying with national policies.
All of the therapists live in a large city several hours from Santa Maria do Herval. While the primarily treatment delivery medium is videoconferencing, each therapist is expected to conduct a face-to-face treatment session at least once during the 12-session treatment model. Because physical touch and proximity are so important in Brazil to forming interpersonal connections, local providers felt that face-to-face sessions are essential to the therapeutic relationship. Visiting the community to conduct these sessions helps therapists understand the unique rural context and allows them to be sensitive to their patients’ environment, be more empathic, and better meet patient needs. It also facilitates collaborative care; it is during these visits that mental health and PCPs interact face-to-face to collaborate.
Telemental health has facilitated the delivery of mental health care in unconventional settings. Integrating mental health care into primary care medical clinics is part of a national strategy and is consistent with WHO recommendations (WHO, 2001). However, in the remote town of Santa Maria do Herval, we are employing a novel approach in an unconventional setting. Patients come to the local medical clinic to receive treatment through telemental health, or when necessary, they receive treatment in their homes through the same medium.
Telemental health in the home helps ensure that our practices are addressing the needs of families. It creates greater access to families, many of whom struggle because of distance and finances to travel to the primary care clinics every week. It also provides a context in which the mental health and PCP can gain greater access to the family system, which will allow greater involvement of siblings, parents, and children in treatment.
Determining Effectiveness

Data-informed decision making is essential to rural and global proofing. With the approval of the Institutional Review Board of the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, the Brazilian team has begun collecting data to determine the effectiveness of our strategy in Brazil. So far, nine patients have been engaged in treatment. Six of these patients have completed the 12-session family treatment. Only one patient dropped out. For all patients, family members were included in treatment.
Our research protocol includes both pre- and posttest administrations of the Global Assessment of Functioning Scale (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), the Self-Report Questionnaire (Beusenberg, Orley, & World Health Organization, 1994), the Global Assessment of Relational Functioning (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), the Clinical Global Impressions (Guy, 1976), and the Revised Dyadic Adjustment Scale (Hollist et al., 2012). All instruments have previously been translated in Portuguese and have shown to be valid and reliable with Brazilian samples. These data will be analyzed and reported in another paper after sufficient data have been collected to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of this approach to treatment delivery in Brazil.
Implications

Brazil is at an important crossroads in determining policies related to telehealth and telemental health. Because of skepticism and caution among policy makers, laws and practice guidelines restrict this treatment modality. Unfortunately, these policies disadvantage people living in rural areas like Santa Maria do Herval. This results in greater disparities in access to care in Brazil. As access increases in urban areas due to (a) policies requiring mental health care be integrated into primary care clinics and (b) greater recognition of mental health problems and treatment, access to care in rural areas stays the same, increasing the urban-rural disparity. Evaluating this intersection between policy and practice is at the heart of rural and global proofing and is precisely why proofing is so important to a comprehensive, coordinated global strategy for addressing mental health disparities.
Bringing our model to scale in Brazil will make important contributions to mental health policies. Our model is the first of its kind in Brazil. Studying its application through systematic data collection will provide an important perspective in the ongoing dialogue about how to increase access to care for all Brazilians. If found to be effective, it will be a model for how collaborative care and telemental health can be used together to improve mental health outcomes.",
"41": "Couples and families experience relationship and family distress at an alarming rate, with up to one third of couples reporting distress at a given time, and nearly 40% of marriages in the United States ending in divorce (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015; Whisman, Beach, & Snyder, 2008). Relationship distress is associated with increased risk of mental and physical health problems, including depression, anxiety, substance use, and cardiovascular and immune diseases (Robles, Slatcher, Trombello, & McGinn, 2014). Despite the prevalence and negative impact of relationship distress, few couples seek professional help for relationship problems. In lieu of couple therapy, the majority of couples turn to self-help books or relationship workshops (Stewart, Bradford, Higginbotham, & Skogrand, 2016), and those who do seek couple therapy most frequently do so with a religious leader or organization (Doss, Rhoades, Stanley, & Markman, 2009). Moreover, nearly one in five children and adolescents experience mental illness, with the most common diagnoses being disruptive behavior disorders, mood disorders, anxiety disorders, and developmental disorders (Olfson, Blanco, Wang, Laje, & Correll, 2014). Despite the prevalence of childhood problems, geographic barriers to care, mental health stigma, and lack of financial resources prevent many from seeking and/or accessing help (Mukolo, Heflinger, & Wallston, 2010).
Technology Can Be Leveraged to Increase the Reach of Services for Couples and Families

Technological advances provide tremendous opportunities for couple and family services to overcome common barriers to treatment seeking and improve cost effectiveness.
Reduced Barriers
First, technology can be harnessed to overcome logistical barriers and provide unfettered access to services at the pace, schedule, and preference of the client. The most commonly discussed benefit of technology use in psychological interventions is its potential to transcend the confines of geography (Nelson & Bui, 2010) and extend the reach of psychological services (Comer & Barlow, 2014). The majority of mental health services are concentrated in major metropolitan regions and academic hubs. As a result, a sizable proportion of United States countries—especially rural and remote communities—do not have a mental health provider specializing in youth, family, or relationship interventions (National Organization of State Offices of Rural Health, 2011). In contrast, 77% of adults in the United States own a smartphone and 73% have broadband access at home; in rural areas of the United States, the comparable numbers are 67% and 63%, respectively (Smith, 2017).
Improved Cost Effectiveness
Financial burdens associated with mental health care often reduce or prevent access to mental health treatment (Sareen et al., 2007). Financial barriers are especially acute for treatments of relationship or family distress because insurance companies often do not reimburse for couple therapy or family interventions not focused on a child’s diagnosis. Technology can seemingly be used to overcome these financial barriers, although the issue has received scant empirical attention. For clients, technology can reduce transportation, parking, and childcare costs that are often associated with clinic-based treatment (Smit et al., 2006). Technology may also reduce costs for providers, as brick-and-mortar therapy rooms are not required. Moreover, most of the costs of automated or asynchronous applications are incurred up front, with little added costs associated with each additional couple or family served (e.g., Georgia, Rothman, Roddy, & Doss, 2017).
Importance of Technology for Family and Couple Interventions

Integration of technology into interventions may be particularly useful for the unique needs and circumstances of couples and families. First, couple and family interventions come with unique barriers to access to care. Treatment involving multiple participants requires coordination of multiple schedules and costs associated with multiple people missing work or school. Couple and family treatment also requires engagement of more clients with different priorities or goals. Unfortunately, unwillingness of family members to attend therapy sessions contributes to nonengagement in therapy (Wang et al., 2006).
Second, technology can reduce the stigma of face-to-face family and couple interventions—especially among men and children. Stigma significantly predicts likelihood of seeking mental health services, with higher self-stigma associated with fewer services sought (Lannin, Vogel, Brenner, Abraham, & Heath, 2016). Men are more likely than women to be reluctant about entering in-person couple therapy (Doss, Atkins, & Christensen, 2003). Moreover, children who are less willing to participate in in-person treatments show poorer treatment outcomes (Karver, Handelsman, Fields, & Bickman, 2006).
Types of Technologically-Supported Interventions

In broad strokes, the application of technology to enhance, supplement, or replace in-person mental health interventions can be grouped into two categories: telemental health interventions and behavioral intervention technologies (BITs). Telemental health interventions refer to services that leverage videoconferencing media platforms to facilitate real-time interactions for the provision of mental health care that is traditionally delivered in person (American Telemedicine Association, 2017). BITs include applications of technology that are used to augment in-person treatments (e.g., an app to remind clients of homework assignments or track thoughts/behaviors) or provide self-help interventions without formal in-person treatment (e.g., an online program, with or without coach support). As these applications of technology differ in important ways, we cover each separately in this paper. For both telemental health and BITs, we will present recommendations for design and implementation, recruitment, and evaluation of these technologies. Throughout, we will draw from an extensive body of research that has been conducted on applications of technology for individual disorders (e.g., Marsch, Lord, & Dallery, 2014) and, where available, from the couple and family literature.
Telemental Health Interventions

The key distinguishing feature of telemental health is the use of synchronous interactive telecommunication technologies to enable providers to remotely deliver real-time services. However, telemental health interventions can additionally incorporate asynchronous store-and-forward communications between clients and providers (as well as related BITs). Across health care disciplines, mental health care may be particularly amenable to videoconferencing-based delivery, given that mental health care relies heavily on both verbal and nonverbal communication. Videoconferencing platforms now afford very high quality, simultaneous, two-way audio and video transmissions. Accordingly, clinical interest in telemental health interventions for children, couples, and families, as well as focused research evaluating the potential of such programs, have sharply increased in recent years (e.g., Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017; Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017; Myers, Vander Stoep, Zhou, McCarty, & Katon, 2015; Vander Stoep et al., 2017). For example, Internet-delivered parent-child interaction therapy (I-PCIT; Comer et al., 2015) uses videoconferencing to deliver parent training to families in their own homes; the family uses a webcam to stream family interactions to a therapist who remotely coaches parents through a parent-worn Bluetooth earpiece. Delivering treatment in consumers’ own homes or natural settings increases the ecological validity of interventions for couples and families. For example, in parent training, having the child in his or her typical setting may increase the chances that the child responds in typical ways, providing more representative challenges for the parent and therapist to work through, and facilitating direct opportunities for generalization of treatment gains. Indeed, a recent randomized controlled evaluation found a significantly higher rate of excellent responders among families treated with I-PCIT relative to families treated with clinic-based PCIT (Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017).
How Does One Design and Implement a Telemental Health Intervention?
Matters of security, confidentiality, comfort, engagement, and reimbursement are critical to consider when designing and implementing telemental health couple and family interventions.
Videoconferencing platforms
Videoconference platforms can be lumped into two main categories: standards-based or consumer-grade applications. Standards-based videoconferencing systems involve point-to-point transmission, using an application that is installed on the computer of both the provider and the client. Standards-based point-to-point applications allow for firewalls, encrypted communication, and, in general, a highly secure interface. In general, nothing offers higher quality and security than T-1 and T-3 line connections, which provide point-to-point transmissions that do not go over the public Internet. However, T-1 and T-3 line connections, and related standards-based systems, are very expensive and can require considerable maintenance. As such, standards-based systems can be cost prohibitive for many providers and health care systems, particularly when telemental health interventions are delivered from one site to multiple locations (e.g., individual client homes) rather than to a single site (e.g., one primary care office in a rural community). More affordable and practical consumer-grade alternatives transmit communications over the public Internet from one Internet protocol (IP) address to another, albeit with relatively slower speeds and somewhat reduced security. Many consumer-grade videoconferencing platforms (e.g., VSee) also offer screen-sharing features that allow providers and clients to easily exchange images, progress graphs, or questionnaires, or to remotely collaborate on documents, in real time.
When using a consumer-grade videoconferencing platform, it is critical that the provider confirm that any videoconferencing platform selected: (a) does not store or retain any session information on its network after sessions are complete, (b) allows users to host meetings that are unlisted and requires the host to invite all attendees, (c) requires identification of all meeting attendants, (d) requires all meeting attendants use a strong password to log in, (e) requires approval of “Forgot Password” requests, and (f) uses the advanced encryption standards or comparable algorithm and a secure encryption tunnel (see Chou, Comer, Turvey, Karr, & Spargo, 2016 for further discussion). While several such consumer-grade platforms are available, VSee is a leading provider this is relatively affordable and easy to use.
When selecting appropriate videoconferencing software, the most affordable options are free services, such as Skype, but such platforms offer somewhat poorer audio and video quality than other options (e.g., more disrupted or dropped calls), and importantly they often store and retain meeting data, which raises concerns about privacy and confidentiality. As such, we do not recommend free videoconferencing services, such as Skype, for delivery of telemental health services. Additionally, we recommend that providers and clients use password-protected computing devices (rather than mobile devices) and utilize Ethernet cords (not wireless connections).
Hardware
At a minimum, couple and family telemental health interventions typically require a computing device with online connectivity, webcam, and microphone at both the provider site and at the client site. Most modern-day computing devices include built-in cameras and microphones. Some telemental health programs, such as I-PCIT, entail remote bug-in-the-ear coaching and thus additionally require Bluetooth earpiece devices. Telemental health treatments that entail naturalistic observations of couples or families who may not always be facing the camera throughout the session require an omnidirectional room microphone to capture the full audio of the room, regardless of client position.
Delivery settings
Couple and family telemental health sessions are often grouped into “supervised” and “unsupervised” settings. A supervised setting is one in which clinical staff (albeit not the telemental health provider) is present at the client site. An example of telemental health delivered to a supervised setting is when one is remotely providing mental health care via videoconferencing to a child while that child sits in a pediatrician’s office with a nurse, physician, and/or other health care provider on site. Studies to date of telemental health for children and families delivered to supervised settings have demonstrated strong feasibility, acceptability, efficacy, and client satisfaction (e.g., Myers et al., 2015). Telemental health with certain high-risk client populations may always need to be delivered to a supervised setting. For example, it may be inappropriate to conduct remote sessions with families with maltreatment histories in the absence of a clinical provider at the client site.
It is not always feasible to deliver telemental health in supervised settings, and for some forms of couple or family telemental health it may even be preferable to deliver care to an unsupervised natural setting. Indeed, many telemental health interventions are intentionally designed to evaluate couples and families in their own homes rather than in clinic settings (e.g., I-PCIT; Comer et al., 2015; Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017). Telemental health interventions delivered to unsupervised settings are an increasingly popular telemental health strategy (Luxton, Sirotin, & Mishkind, 2010) and have demonstrated initial feasibility, safety, and efficacy in a growing number of controlled trials (e.g., Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017; Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017). However, safety concerns render telemental health treatment in unsupervised settings inappropriate for some clinical populations, a point to which we now turn.
Safety planning and crisis management
Using videoconferencing to provide remote care in unsupervised settings may be inappropriate for certain high-risk client populations (e.g., maltreating families, suicidal clients). However, clinical emergencies occur even after screening out particularly high-risk clients from telemental health practices. Prior to initiating treatment, the telemental health provider and client must develop a detailed risk management plan in the event that a crisis should occur. Telemental health providers should assess potential safety risks in the client site environment (e.g., firearms and/or household hazards). Therapists should also have a secondary way to contact the participant if technology fails in the middle of a session (e.g., a plan that the therapist will call the client’s cell phone). When telemental health is delivered to clinically supervised settings (e.g., local pediatrician’s office, community outpatient clinic, school site), local professionals must be familiar with emergency procedures. Recent telemental health guidelines (American Telemedicine Association, 2017) advise providers to always: (a) identify local emergency resources and phone numbers, (b) familiarize themselves with the location of the nearest emergency resources capable of managing mental health emergencies, and (c) store contact information for clients’ families and designated supports. During the consent process and throughout treatment, clients should be informed and reminded that in the case of an emergency or if they are unable to reach the therapist due to technology failure and require immediate assistance, they should call 911.
Technological literacy and comfort
Telemental health treatment progress is substantially hindered when participants do not have the knowledge to set up sessions and navigate the features of videoconferencing software. Prior to treatment, it is useful to conduct an informational session over the phone about the technological components of treatment and/or to send clients instructional manuals and troubleshooting resources. Usability is critical for the success of telemental health; interventions that are too complex for clients or for providers will not see widespread adoption and implementation. When resources allow, it is useful to have a dedicated staff member available to provide remote tech support as needed to clients during telemental health sessions. Telemental health providers should also check in frequently with clients to discuss any frustrations with technology and with treatment in general.
Therapeutic alliance and engagement
Clinical trials evaluating couple and family telemental health find high treatment retention, client engagement, client-therapist agreement on therapeutic tasks, client-therapist agreement on therapeutic goals, and client satisfaction, as well as positive affective bonds between clients and therapists (Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017; Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017). Indeed, research consistently demonstrates alliance to be comparable across telemental health and office-based treatment modalities (Comer, Furr, Kerns, et al., 2017). These results are promising, but supplementary steps should nonetheless be taken to maintain engagement and the therapeutic alliance in videoconference-based treatment. Real-time screen-sharing activities (and interactive games when children are involved in treatment) can meaningfully increase client engagement during telemental health and enhance client understanding of session content. For example, in a study of videoconferencing-delivered, family-based treatment for early onset obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), Comer, Furr, Kerns, and colleagues (2017) created interactive computer games using Google Drawing and Google Documents that were collaboratively played in session by the child and therapist. One activity included an interactive “build a worry monster” game in which therapists and families selected cartoon monster features from an image bank to build a cartoon “Worry Monster” in order to help children externalize their OCD (Comer, Furr, et al., 2014).
Reimbursement
Telemental health payment issues vary widely by provider, services offered, population treated, and insurance provider. Medicaid reimbursement covers telemental health in most states (Center for Telehealth and eHealth Law, 2011) and even includes an additional “telehealth originating site facility fee.” States vary, however, as to whether they will reimburse for telemental health outside of delivery to rural or otherwise underserved regions. Unfortunately, many private payers do not currently reimburse for telemental health services; however, trends point to increasing coverage for telemental health by private insurers (Center for Telehealth and eHealth Law, 2011).
How Does One Recruit for a Telemental Health Intervention?
Many couple and family telemental health providers offer both clinic-based and videoconferencing-based treatment options, and their recruitment for telemental health services does not extend beyond recruitment efforts in place for clinic-based services. Accordingly, clients treated via videoconferencing are often those who initially reach out for services at a provider’s brick-and-mortar office, and then elect to participate in remote treatment options to improve the convenience of care. Broader recruitment efforts for telemental health are needed.
Successful recruitment methods for telemental health have included collaboration and engagement with pediatric and primary care practices (e.g., Myers et al., 2015), school settings (Stephan, Lever, Bernstein, Edwards, & Pruitt, 2016), and juvenile justice systems (Batastini, 2016). Outreach to rural and other underserved and remote communities is particularly needed (Nelson & Bui, 2010). Given the increasing role of the Internet as the first point of contact for couples and families seeking health care resources, telemental health providers must maintain a strong web presence.
Although telemental health increases opportunities to treat clients near and far, licensure and jurisdiction matters merit comment. At this time, most states require that providers be licensed in the state in which the client is receiving services (regardless of where the therapist is situated at the time of care; see Kramer, Kinn, & Mishkind, 2015 for a review of legal and regulatory issues). Although specific licensure regulations vary across states, for the most part, a telemental health provider can only deliver telemental health services to clients in states in which the provider is licensed; thus, they are important considerations in recruitment.
How Does One Test a Telemental Health Intervention?
To continue to move the field of couples and family telemental health forward, researchers must systematically rely on research strategies that achieve favorable balances between scientific rigor and clinical relevance.
Control conditions
When designing a randomized clinical trial to evaluate a telemental health family or couple intervention, the first task is to select an appropriate control condition against which to compare the outcomes of the telemental health intervention. Here, we consider three primary options. First, “no-treatment” and “waitlist” controls assess the overall effect of the intervention but cannot meaningfully isolate the specific effects of the intervention or the effects of delivering the intervention via a videoconferencing portal.
A second control condition is one in which participants receive the office-based format of the same treatment. Such a comparison benchmarks outcomes against the same intervention delivered in person, with a common hypothesis being that there will be no difference between the two groups (i.e., a noninferiority trial). In this design, an a priori decision is first made about the minimum difference between the conditions that would be meaningful enough to deem the groups nonequivalent (e.g., a 0.2 SD difference), and then tests are conducted to reject the null hypothesis that the observed difference between the two conditions is less than or equal to the a priori minimum difference deemed meaningful (see Rogers, Howard, & Vessey, 1993). The only component manipulated is the delivery format (Internet vs. face-to-face), as treatment content is held constant, and condition differences can be attributed exclusively to the modality of care. Other trials might hypothesize that the telemental health format will yield a significant improvement over a standard clinic-based format, and indeed some recent trials have found telemental health formats to outperform parallel clinic-based care for family problems (e.g., Comer, Furr, Miguel, et al., 2017).
Despite the advantages and rigor inherent in comparing a telemental health intervention with a parallel office-based format of that same intervention, such a comparison requires that participants live close enough to the investigative team so that they can feasibly participate in office-based treatment if that is the condition to which they are assigned. Findings from such a trial may not generalize to the more geographically remote and underserved populations for whom telemental health formats are most needed. As Chou, Bry, and Comer (2017) note, in order to position technology-based treatments for optimal uptake and reach, research needs to examine these treatments in the very populations that they are envisioned to serve.
Drawing on a “treatment as usual” (TAU) comparison—in which control participants are provided the standard of care that is routinely given to that population in their own community—increases the portability of a trial and allows the investigator to examine a telemental health couple or family intervention in more remote and underserved populations. Unlike trials comparing telemental health with the same treatment delivered in an office-based format, TAU comparisons do not require that participants live close enough to the investigative team so that they can feasibly participate in either treatment condition. Despite the benefits, however, what exactly constitutes TAU is difficult to operationalize as it varies widely across regions and settings, making it difficult to integrate findings across studies. Further, differences between a telemental health intervention and a TAU condition might be attributed to differences in provider training, quality, or supervision, or to differences in the frequency, duration, or intensity of care, rather than to differences in the treatment delivery format.
Outcomes
Testing telemental health couple and family interventions requires one to decide what dependent variables to assess and how to assess them. In addition to standard clinical trial outcomes (e.g., symptom responses, diagnostic responses, improvements in functioning and quality of life), investigators of telemental health couple and family interventions are particularly interested in assessing the acceptability and feasibility of the novel intervention format. Matters of treatment satisfaction and therapeutic engagement and alliance are critical. Moreover, investigators of telemental health are wise to assess technological barriers to care, including technology-related disruptions to treatment delivery as well as negative technology-related attitudes and poor technological literacy that can interfere with treatment engagement or moderate treatment responses.
Finally, to facilitate subsequent cost-effectiveness analyses, one should record costs and savings associated with treatment delivery. These costs include, but are not limited to, technology to deliver the intervention (both client and therapist expenses), therapist salaries for initial training and ongoing treatment delivery, and supervisor salaries for training and ongoing supervision. Savings that will need to be recorded are beneficial effects of the program (on key outcome variables) as well as savings resulting from reductions in costs typically associated with in-person treatment (e.g., transportation, office space, child care, missed work or school).
Funding
The research needed to evaluate the promise and potential of telemental health will be a very costly endeavor. As Chou, Bry, and Comer (2017) note, current federal funding priorities in mental health are focused on an experimental therapeutics agenda—in which conceptual mechanisms underlying intervention effectiveness and neurobiological treatment targets are often prioritized over examinations of treatment outcomes and innovative delivery formats. Researchers working to develop and evaluate telemental health interventions will need to be increasingly creative in order to secure needed funding. Industry partnerships and newer funding sources (e.g., the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute) may be critical for supporting the costly work needed.
Telemental Health Interventions or BITs?
Telemental health interventions hold great promise to transform the accessibility and scope of real-time mental health care with a provider by overcoming traditional geographic barriers and treating families in their natural settings. However, telemental health interventions for couples and families are not without limitations. Most notably, telemental health does not increase the overall number of individuals, couples, and families who can be treated at a given time. There is an enormous discrepancy between the large numbers in need of care and the relatively small numbers of providers. The discrepancy is so large that Kazdin and Blase (2011) estimated that even doubling the mental health workforce would yield only a minor public health impact. Using synchronous communication technologies to provide real-time services still requires a live provider for every session. As such, BITs that rely largely on self-administration and/or asynchronous communications with providers are better equipped than telemental health interventions to increase the number of individuals, couples, and families that can be treated.
BITs

As described earlier, BITs either augment in-person treatment or provide self-help interventions without in-person treatment. Not surprisingly, BITs can take on many forms (Muñoz, 2017). Deciding which type of BIT suits a particular target population and intervention goals requires an understanding of the different practices.
Automated BITs
Automated couple and family BITs omit therapist, coach, or staff support and rely solely on technology to provide the intervention to consumers. This category of automated BITs includes apps, websites, and/or phone lines that use voice or text recognition software to respond to client needs. Without the need for human support, automated BITs have the potential to reach limitless number of clients continuously as there is no need to coordinate schedules or limitation of staff hours. Additionally, the potential for translation of these programs into different languages can further increase their reach. The quality of the automated BIT can range from standardized information, such as learning about a particular disorder, to personalized prompts and feedback based on an array of previously entered or acquired data.
Guided BITs
In guided BITs, like automated BITs, technology provides the majority of the couple and family intervention. However, guided BITs also include personal support in the form of a therapist or coach. There is great variety within guided BITs as to the quantity and intensity of human support provided, ranging from the high end of using therapists throughout the intervention to the low end of using trained staff to aid in technological issues on an as-needed basis. Compared with in-person delivery of services and telemental health, guided BITs have the potential to significantly decrease delivery costs, improve the reach of interventions across geographic boundaries, and increase the flexibility of services (e.g., online activities can be completed on the user’s schedule, not on the provider’s schedule). However, guided BITs still involve some staff contact and associated salary and training costs.
Compared with automated BITs, guided BITs provide users with a greater sense of accountability, encouragement, and motivation to both complete and engage in program content. Users in guided BITs, compared with automated BITs, tend to report higher levels of satisfaction with the intervention (Aardoom et al., 2016). Additionally, within couple and family interventions, guided BITs show superior completion rates and clinical outcomes compared with automated BITs (Roddy, Nowlan, & Doss, 2016). However, with advancements in automated feedback (e.g., including, and tailored to, participants’ responses in the program), there is some emerging evidence that automated BITs are getting closer to guided BITs in their completion rates and clinical outcomes (e.g., Dear et al., 2015; Kelders Bohlmeijer, Pots, & van Gemert-Pijnen, 2015; Titov et al., 2015). Our sense is that, with improvements in technology, automated BITs may soon be able to provide contingent and personalized feedback rivaling that found in Guided BITs. What remains to be seen is how important the personal connection with a coach, absent in even the best automated BITs, is in encouraging program completion.
Blended BITs
Blended BITs can also be used to augment traditional in-person couple and family services rather than substitute for them. Many therapists are already utilizing BITs in this manner (often without labeling it as such) by encouraging clients to use cell phone apps to track behaviors, moods, or automatic thoughts between in-person sessions or to monitor sleep and activity with wearable technology (Muñoz, 2017). Augmented BITs are easy to incorporate into clinicians’ current practice and, for clients who are accustomed to using their phones or computers daily, may be more attractive than diaries or worksheets for completing homework assignments. Additionally, the supplemental reminders and practice have been shown to improve treatment outcomes (e.g., Jones et al., 2014). However, augmented BITs do little to increase the reach of interventions. Because clinicians incorporating blended BITs provide the majority of clinical work in face-to-face sessions, the level of training to provide quality intervention is equally as high as training an in-person provider who does not use BITs. Furthermore, the provider’s ability to interact with the client via BITs is limited by the provider’s availability, therapy training, and knowledge of the technology.
How Does One Design and Implement a BIT?

After deciding to build a couple or family BIT, there are multiple decision points in the design process. Below, we include several considerations and their implications for BIT design.
Will the BIT Meet the Intended Need?
To ensure that one’s vision is aligned with couples’ or families’ perceived needs, conducting a series of interviews is essential. The first two sets of interviews should consist of the target audience, with two sets being helpful to ensure that ideas converge across the two sets. In these interviews, open-ended questions should dominate: Do they see a need? If so, what? What would they want to address that need? What would they be willing (and not willing) to do to address that need? Toward the end of the interview, turning to more specific ideas for BIT content can be helpful. If one is contemplating building an augmented BIT, utilizing additional interviews with providers that will be assigning and utilizing the BIT is important.
Who Will Be Using the BIT?
With more than one user (e.g., both partners of a couple or coparenting team; a parent and child), one must consider which activities they will be doing together and which they will doing separately. Completing activities jointly allows for opportunities to discuss the material in the moment. However, joint completion also has its disadvantages. It may be more difficult for more than one person to view the content (if completed on a smartphone) and different reading speeds may create frustration. Working together may also limit each individual’s ability to reflect on their own internal experience, especially if users are asked to write in their responses. Completing the BIT together also requires both partners to be available and in the same place; in contrast, individual activities can be completed on the bus/train home from work or when parents work different schedules. Finally, if the dyad or family is experiencing conflict, joint completion of activities may increase the risk that the BIT would start an argument.
In the BITs we have developed, we have found a mixture of individual and joint activities to be the most useful when more than one user is involved (Doss, Benson, Georgia, & Christensen, 2013). For example, in the OurRelationship BIT (Doss et al., 2016), both members of a distressed couple work together to select, understand, and then solve a relationship problem. The majority of each phase—where users view tailored feedback about their relationship and write about how the ideas apply to their own relationship—is completed individually. At the end of each phase, couples are brought together in a joint activity to have a structured conversation where the program displays portions of what users wrote during the individual activities and the couple is encouraged to discuss them. However, other online BITs for relationships encourage couples to complete all activities together to maximize opportunities for discussion (e.g., Braithwaite & Fincham, 2014). Therefore, the best balance of joint and individual activities will depend on the BIT’s content, purpose, and audience.
Native Apps Versus Web-Based Programs
Native apps, which are programs built for a particular device (usually a smartphone or tablet), have important advantages. They can be downloaded onto the device and subsequently used without an Internet connection. Native apps also tend to interact more seamlessly with a device’s other functionality, which can be important if GPS data, motion sensors, or related functionality is a central part of the BIT. However, native apps also have their disadvantages. At a minimum, two versions need to be built—one for the Apple operating systems (iPhone, iPad) and one for Android systems (Android smartphones such as Samsung); additionally, depending on the functionality the app needs to harness, it may be necessary to have different versions for smartphones and tablets even within the same operating system. Those multiple builds increase costs for initial build and maintenance and additional complexity in managing the resulting data.
Web-based applications, in contrast, require an Internet connection (via a computer or smartphone) and cannot take as much advantage of the device’s functionality. However, using a device’s Internet browser, only a single version needs to be built (often at a lower cost than a single version of a native app), reducing both costs and complexity of a web-based BIT. In the rest of this article, we are going to focus on describing web-based guided BITs for two reasons: (a) currently, they are more cost effective for investigators seeking to develop their first BIT, and (b) we expect any information we would provide on native apps would become quickly outdated; in contrast, the recent rise of HTML5 as the dominant web language across devices and operating systems forecasts a relative stability of functionality required for web-based BITs.
Necessary Components of a Web-Based BIT
If a web-based BIT (instead of a native app) is the best fit, one must consider the requirements of the intervention content itself as well as the requirements of the platform in which the activities are housed.
If one’s goal is to deliver an intervention with text, audio, video, and some interactivity (e.g., clicking, drag-and-drop interactions), there are several excellent and relatively inexpensive options available; at this time, we recommend Articulate (www.articulate.com), Adobe Captivate, and Lectora. With a larger initial budget, the Adapt open-source functionality (www.AdaptLearning.org) is a good option. Content in Adapt is “responsive” (displays different content or using different layouts based on the size of the device’s screen). Additionally, Adapt has more options to interact with an online database, facilitating saving and recalling complex variables (e.g., calculated formulas) across the user’s sessions in the BIT.
In addition to the content of the BIT, one may also need to consider housing that content in a learner management system (LMS), such as Blackboard, Moodle, or Totara. An LMS allows one to require users to register for the intervention (restricting who has access to the content—critical for a randomized trial), make content availability contingent on completion of previous content, and tract usage of the content. An LMS will also be necessary if the online content needs to interface with a database—essential to save users’ responses in the program, to make content available across different sessions/devices, or to pull information from different accounts (e.g., allowing the wife to see a subset of the husband’s responses).
The Role of Coaches in a Guided BIT
Coaches in a guided BIT tend to help users apply program content, reinforce fundamental skills, brainstorm solutions to any issues that may arise, and ensure that users are not misinterpreting content (Schueller, Tomasino, & Mohr, 2016). Coaches also provide a direct contact for technical assistance and problems with program functionality.
The professional training level of coaches does not seem to impact clinical outcomes. For example, Titov et al. (2010) found no significant differences between technician-based and clinician-based support in a BIT for depression, with both significantly improving symptom outcomes more than a waitlist control group. This pattern suggests that professional support may not be necessary for BITs to function successfully (Titov et al., 2010), especially since many guided BITs are tightly scripted. As such, the use of paraprofessionals or graduate level trainees as coaches is both cost efficient and effective.
Furthermore, less may actually be more when it comes to the frequency of coach support. Indeed, BITs with about 90 total minutes of coach contact throughout the course of the intervention have been shown to outperform BITs that used therapist support as primary delivery of program content, suggesting that more frequent contact might negatively impact consumer volition (Schueller et al., 2016). Therefore, Schueller and colleagues (2016) recommend that BITs include few and regularly spaced opportunities for coach support. For example, users in the OurRelationship BIT are able to complete online content at their own pace until they reach three program milestones, at which points they are asked to meet with their coach before continuing. This model helps to ensure that program content is well understood before it is applied and expanded upon in later modules, while at the same time allowing users considerable flexibility to complete activities on their own schedules during the interim.
Contact modality, such as email, synchronous messaging, phone calls, and video conferencing, plays an important role in BIT adherence. Asynchronous emails have been found to help increase overall program use (Mohr et al., 2013); moreover, texts may be a more efficient medium than email (Schueller et al., 2016).
How Does One Recruit for a BIT?

For blended BITs, targeting the providers who will use the BIT will likely be the most efficient recruitment strategy; this type of recruitment approach is described in the Telemental Health Interventions section. For automated or guided BITs, effective recruitment strategies will likely include a combination of agreements with existing organizations and online recruitment targeting couples/families directly. If problem recognition and/or education about BITs is the advertising goal, then reaching out to the target audience—in person or online—is warranted. For example, on Facebook and using Google display ads, one can target potential participants based on their geographic location, race, ethnicity, education, income, and other interests/websites visited. In contrast, if one hopes to recruit samples who are already seeking help (but may or may not have decided to seek a BIT), then advertising where the population is likely to seek that help can be effective. For example, on online search engines such as Google and Bing, one can target advertisements to individuals’ searches related to presenting problems or interventions. If the BIT is an app, then advertising on the App Store and/or Google Play are natural ways to target individuals searching for apps related to your BIT.
How Does One Test a BIT?

There are four broad considerations in conducting an online randomized controlled trial (RCT) of a BIT—assessment, random assignment, study duration, and selection of appropriate control groups.
Assessment
Currently, the most popular online assessment programs are Qualtrics and SurveyMonkey; we suspect that most universities in the United States have an institutional subscription to one or the other. Both programs provide numerous question types and complex logic functionality. Alternatively, if a BIT is paired with an LMS, many eLearning software programs such as Articulate and Adapt include integrated assessment functionally (enhancing user experience); however, the functionality tends to be more limited than dedicated assessment functionality such as Qualtrics. Additionally, given the relatively high rate of attrition in BITs, it is important to conduct assessments early in the intervention to obtain estimates of change for all participants. These early data points can be used to reduce bias in subsequent data analyses.
Outcomes
As described in detail in the Telemental Health Interventions section, measures of satisfaction and engagement are important for couple and family BITs as well. To construct cost-effectiveness estimates, in addition to the training and delivery costs detailed in the Telemental Health Interventions section, it is important to maintain accurate estimates of costs associated with initial development (and any subsequent refinement) of the BIT. Initial development costs for BITs are often significantly higher than ongoing costs to deliver the treatment and thus weigh heavily on cost estimates. In particular, costs associated with construction of the app/online content, LMS (if relevant), and online advertising should be recorded.
Duration
Given the rapidly changing pace of technology, some authors have argued that it is inappropriate to restrict changes to an intervention during evaluation because, by the time the RCT is complete, the tested intervention is outdated (e.g., Mohr et al., 2015). If rapid recruitment is not possible, then authors have recommended conducting “trials of intervention principles” (Mohr et al., 2015) or sequential, multiple assignment, randomized trials (SMART designs; Collins, Nahum-Shani, & Almirall, 2014) that permit inclusion of alternative or updated versions of an intervention.
Control Conditions
When selecting a control group for a BIT RCT, many of the same considerations apply as for in-person studies. However, when recruiting participants online, it is especially important to consider that any participants assigned to a control group will likely have other options (outside of the study) at their fingertips. To reduce the number of control couples or families who seek services elsewhere, it may be beneficial to make the control group a wait-list control group (if the waiting period is not too long) or a viable alternative treatment (either another active intervention or a placebo-control intervention).
What Are Important Ethical/Legal Considerations in Delivering and Testing a BIT?

Testing and delivering couple and family BITs adds several important ethical and legal considerations to those typically involved in face-to-face interventions.
License Jurisdiction
In many cases, a BIT can be considered a self-help intervention (with or without “coach,” not “therapist,” support) and thus does not require a license to deliver. However, if the BIT provides services that can be understood to represent the practice of psychology that would otherwise require a license to provide, then one must be careful that the therapist is licensed in the state or jurisdiction where participants reside. Issues of license jurisdiction are described in more detail in the Telemental Health Interventions section above.
Online Assessment
In conducting online assessments, one important consideration is whether your data will need to be Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant (including the HITECH Act— “Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health” —and/or related Department of Health and Human Services rules). At the time of writing, both Qualtrics and SurveyMonkey require a premium level of services and a special contract that designates them as a Business Associate to be HIPAA compliant.
Video
If the couple or family intervention is subject to HIPAA regulations, then HIPAA-compliant video services need to be used. Although several are available, VSee is a provider that specializes in HIPAA-compliant videoconferencing at affordable rates. If an intervention is not subject to HIPAA, investigators should consider whether using a videoconferencing software that will be more familiar to users might be a better fit (especially for participants who are not technologically savvy). For example, FaceTime offers “end-to-end” encryption, meaning that Apple can not access the content of the calls. Conversations over Skype and Google Hangouts are encrypted; however, this encryption is not currently “end-to-end.”
Emergencies
When concerning levels of domestic violence or suicidality are reported, we suggest participants should be immediately provided with both the website and phone number for the relevant hotline—either the National Domestic Violence Hotline or the National Suicide Prevention lifeline. Most assessment functionality allows for this contact information to be provided in real time in a conditional manner based on a user’s response to a previous item.
Mandatory Reporting
Finally, if implementing a couple or family BIT across state lines (or internationally), investigators must consider that mandatory reporting guidelines for child and elder abuse vary by state. There are several helpful compilations of state laws regarding child abuse (https://www.childwelfare.gov/topics/systemwide/laws-policies/state/) and elder abuse (https://ncea.acl.gov/whatwedo/policy/state.html).
Technology’s Impact on the Conceptual Framework for Couple and Family Interventions

To this point, we have focused on the impact that technology can have in improving the efficacy or reach of interventions for couples and families. However, it is also important to consider how technology can affect the field’s conceptual framework. First, the increased reach of technology-enhanced interventions allows for more diverse and larger samples of couples and families, which, in turn, permits testing treatment moderators such as race, ethnicity, acculturation, income, education, or type of relationship problems. For instance, despite guidance on how to tailor interventions for African American couples (e.g., Boyd-Franklin, Kelly, & Durham, 2008), there have been only a handful of studies that have examined differential outcomes by race or ethnicity (e.g., Doss et al., 2012; Rhoades, 2015).
Second, technology allows us to collect new measures with increasing sophistication and specificity, improving our ability to identify and test mechanisms of our treatments. One of the central challenges of assessing mechanisms is that, to permit the strongest evidence of their role, mechanisms should be measured after they have been affected by the intervention but before they have a chance to change the ultimate outcome variable. Technology, with its ability to integrate more frequent measures of putative mechanisms, allows the opportunity to assess mechanisms without making a priori assumptions about the exact timeframe. More frequent assessments also increase the chance of detecting change in an individual before it affects the broader couple or family system. Additionally, technology increases the opportunities to collect implicit or behavioral measures (e.g., automated calculation of vocal stress during real-world conversations), increasing the chances that change in the mechanism can be captured before a participant can self-report on that change (and thus before it has the opportunity to affect the participant’s global evaluations).
Third, the availability of technology-enhanced interventions may inform repackaging of our treatments. For example, in the individual adult literatures, transdiagnostic interventions have gained significant momentum (e.g., Sauer-Zavala et al., 2017); recent studies have further demonstrated that web-based transdiagnostic interventions seem to have similar effects across anxiety and depressive disorders (e.g., Dear et al., 2015; Titov et al., 2015). Although there have been recent calls to combine couple- and child-focused interventions, studies to date have utilized relatively small samples (e.g., Zemp, Milek, Cummings, Cina, & Bodenmann, 2016) which may have missed small- and medium-sized benefits of this combination. Furthermore, efforts to develop and test transdiagnostic interventions for youth (Queen, Barlow, & Ehrenreich-May, 2014) have been initiated but large-sample web-based studies would allow more detailed examination of these possibilities.
Conclusion

We believe the role of technology in couple and family interventions is expanding rapidly; the question is no longer if technology integration can be helpful but how and when it can be helpful. Indeed, technology has enormous potential to improve the efficacy of our face-to-face interventions, facilitate skill acquisition and application to real-world settings, decrease provider burden, and expand the reach of our interventions to couples and families who would otherwise not receive services. However, technology is not a panacea; if utilized incorrectly or inappropriately, it could decrease the efficacy of our treatments and increase risks for our clients. In this article, we have identified key considerations and provided conceptual and methodological guidance for investigators in the successful development, refinement, and evaluation of their couple and family telemental health interventions or BITs. Although the relatively young field of technology-based and technology-facilitated treatments has already amassed an impressive initial base of knowledge, many of the most important answers are still ahead of us. As in any new area of study, advances have emerged quickly, and we are just now starting to see consistency in terminology and consensus in methodology. Research and development efforts need to stay agile in order to keep pace with the rapidly evolving possibilities of modern technology. The conceptual frameworks and perspectives on technology-based interventions outlined throughout this paper can serve to guide the next wave of needed innovation and research in a manner that maximizes both scientific rigor and clinical utility.",
"42": "The ability to search the web, develop ideas and communicate securely may be the only way in which many can explore basic aspects of identity, such as one’s gender, religion, ethnicity, national origin or sexuality.
—David Kaye, United Nations Special Rapporteur (Kaye, 2015, p. 5)

In 1961, Wittson and colleagues pioneered the first group therapy environment using two-way televisions. Wittson, Affleck, and Johnson (1961) placed clients in one room and the therapist in another. Video cameras allowed both parties to see what the other was saying and doing. Implementation of technology in therapy was seen as a success with the possibility for great advances. Wittson and colleagues were, however, limited in their ability to send signals long distances because the Internet had not yet been invented (Isaacson, 2014). Over the last few decades, an exponential rise in technology has allowed the Internet and associated services to flourish (Isaacson, 2014). During the 1990s, interest in telemedicine, which represents clinical consultations by digital proxy, grew (Perednia & Allen, 1995). Psychologists saw an opportunity to provide services across diverse populations and locales.
Broadly, technological mental health services and communications have been termed “telepsychology” (American Psychological Association [APA], 2013a). Telepsychological services can include both synchronous and asynchronous communication (e.g., videoconferencing vs. e-mail, respectively; APA, 2013a). Synchronous communication allows involved parties to see and/or hear each person at the exact same time. Asynchronous communication can occur in intervals, immediately, and/or delayed, depending on the technology involved. This article focuses on the role of synchronous telepsychology, but more specifically, telemental health therapy (TMHT). Historical information, literature on its effectiveness, hardware and software used, funding and initiatives, prevalence, and training in TMHT are presented in the succeeding section.
Across therapeutic mediums, psychologists are responsible for protecting client privacy and confidentiality (APA, 2010, 2013a). Generally, technological advancements challenge psychologists to provide competent care, maintain privacy and confidentiality, and inform clients of the risks involved (Baker & Bufka, 2011; Lustgarten, 2015). Regardless of the chosen hardware and software, psychologists should consider emerging threats to the ethical provision of TMHT. In June 2013, specific governmental threats to client privacy, leaked by Edward Snowden, showed that the National Security Agency (NSA) was engaging in attempts to access protected data across the world (Greenwald, 2014). NSA slides revealed that “email,” “chat—video, voice,” “videos,” “photos,” “stored data,” “VoIP,” “file transfers,” “video conferencing,” “notifications of target activity—logins, etc.,” “online social networking details,” and “special requests” were are all accessible (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). The authors of this article review four key governmental programs that may threaten ethical delivery of TMHT: PRISM, MUSCULAR, Optic Nerve, and National Security Letters (NSLs).
Technology has a “facilitative” ability to meet clients’ needs and provide services at large distances (APA, 2013a, p. 5). This is an empowering time for both psychologists and clients. Despite these advances, threats to multiple ethical standards exist and are appraised in this article (APA, 2010). To prevent unintended breaches of privacy and confidentiality, along with providing competent care, best practices and key takeaways for psychologists are introduced.
A Review of Telemental Health Therapy

Introduction and History
The first provision of distance health care was documented at Haukel Hospital in Norway in 1920 (Smith & Allis, 1998). Radio links were established to provide support services to ships at sea. The field of mental health was introduced to telecommunication in the 1950s when staff at the Nebraska Psychiatric Institute began using one-way closed circuit televisions for lectures and instructional purposes (Smith & Allis, 1998). However, it was not until the early 1960s when early forms of TMHT, which used microwaves and cables, demonstrated that mental health service could be conducted between geographically separated sites (Dwyer, 1973). At the time, the hardware was cumbersome and expensive, programs were laborious to establish and implement, and the distances between sites were limited (typically 2 to 20 miles).
Over time, information and telecommunication technology advanced to the point at which regular mental health service provision via the Internet became practical. In the 1990s, several regional programs demonstrated that advancements in technology made it possible to provide a wide range of services at a distance, including patient evaluations, case management, medication management, crisis response, treatment planning, therapy (individual, group, and family), mental status evaluations, support groups, and more (Smith & Allis, 1998). Today, the use of preestablished networks, telecommunication infrastructure, communication satellites, and information technology personnel within most organizations has made the delivery of TMHT around the globe more affordable and accessible.
Utility and Effectiveness
TMHT is effective for treating various disorders (Bee et al., 2008; Postel, de Haan, & De Jong, 2008), including posttraumatic stress disorder (Germain, Marchand, Bouchard, Drouin, & Guay, 2009), depression (Sloan, Gallagher, Feinstein, Lee, & Pruneau, 2011), anxiety (Ruskin et al., 2004), substance use (Frueh, Henderson, & Myrick, 2005), chronic pain (Macea, Gajos, Calil, & Fregni, 2010), and others (Mallen, Vogel, Rochlen, & Day, 2005). Research has repeatedly shown the effectiveness of using TMHT in lieu of in-person services, particularly videoconferencing (Backhaus et al., 2012). Some clients find the medium useful and effective for alleviating various presenting problems (Mallen et al., 2005; Wagner, Horn, & Maercker, 2014), including isolation (Kruger et al., 2001) and barriers to seeking treatment (Moore, Guthmann, Rogers, Fraker, & Embree, 2009; Rochlen, Land, & Wong, 2004).
Research suggests TMHT is useful for treating a wide range of mental health concerns as well as diverse populations (Backhaus et al., 2012). It also offers opportunities to stay in contact with traveling clients, people in remote locations, and people with restricted mobility, and to offer specialized treatments to individuals who would not otherwise have access (Colbow, 2013). Moreover, the working alliance appears to develop similarly to that of face-to-face therapy (Mallen et al., 2005). Telecommunication has been used for outpatient and inpatient services; diagnosis; group, individual, marital, and family therapy; children and adolescents; assessment; case management; psychoeducation; involuntary commitments; and more (American Telemedicine Association, 2009; Colbow, 2013).
Hardware and Software
Major hospital systems have been using telecommunication technology to provide mental health services for years (Godleski, Darkins, & Peters, 2012; Missouri Telehealth Network, 2015). More recently, TMHT has extended its reach into independent practice (McCrickard & Butler, 2005). Organizations such as the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and other large-scale hospital systems usually use integrated, single-purpose, teleconferencing technologies manufactured by AVAYA/Radvision, Cisco/Tandberg, and Polycom (Department of Defense [DoD], 2013). Providers, typically independent practice clinicians, not using integrated telecommunication technology, tend to utilize hardware peripherals (e.g., webcam, microphone, monitor) and software platforms (e.g., Adobe Connect, Cisco WebEx, Citrix GoToMeeting, Microsoft Live Meeting, Vidyo, and VSee), which employ client and practitioner personal or business computers (Breakthrough Behavioral, Inc., 2015; iTherapy, 2014; MyTherapyNet, 2015; Virtual Therapy Connect, 2015; Wecounsel, 2015).
Funding and Initiatives
State and federal governments have been promoting the use of telecommunication for health-related services by providing grants, technical assistance, policy, and educational information (Federal Communications Commission, 2015; Health Resources and Services Administration, 2015). The federal government in particular offers grants to state licensing boards to establish cooperative programs between states to reduce statutory and regulatory barriers to telemedicine. Telehealth initiatives to create and foster state- or region-wide networks have been underway in states such as Nebraska (Nebraska Statewide TeleHealth Network, 2006), Oklahoma, Missouri (Missouri Telehealth Network, 2015), California (California Telehealth Network, 2013), Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming (Northwest Regional Telehealth Resource Center, 2005). More recently, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) announced the Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact (PSYPACT; APA Practice Organization, 2015). PSYPACT would allow states “a reasonable yet responsible way for qualified psychologists to offer services across state lines for temporary practice or practice using telecommunications technology” (APA Practice Organization, 2015, para. 1). The PSYPACT encourages state cooperation around licensure reciprocity, regulation of services, and facilitates the exchange of information (ASPPB, 2016). Overall, the objective of these initiatives and programs is to create state or regional networks, interjurisdictional practice, educational materials, and technical support to enable users to engage in real-time videoconferencing and communications for health-related services and to improve health care services for medically underserved populations.
To enhance the aforementioned initiatives, states are creating legislation to ensure that insurance providers will cover telehealth services (American Telemedicine Association, 2013; National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015). In 2013, the APA (2013b) released the “Telepsychology 50-State Review” that outlines state regulations, licensing board opinions about providing TMHT, insurance coverage mandates, and potential penalties for practicing across state lines. Medicaid, being the largest payer for mental health services in the United States, is already being required to cover telehealth services (Medicaid, 2015; National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015). Presently, 43 states and the District of Columbia provide Medicaid reimbursement for telehealth services. Nineteen of these states also require private insurance plans to cover telehealth services and more are expected to join in the coming years (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015).
Prevalence
The number of people accessing mental health services through these technologies are growing. In 2012, the VA reported over 500,000 TMHT encounters (Godleski et al., 2012). The APA conducted a survey in 2008, which found that 87% of practitioners used some form of telecommunication technology (e.g., telephone or e-mail) in their practice and 7% of practitioners surveyed used some form of videoconferencing to provide services (Jacobsen & Kohout, 2010). These numbers are up from 2000, in which 82% of the practitioners surveyed used some form of telecommunication technology in their practice and only 2% of the practitioners reported using videoconferencing to provide services (Jacobsen & Kohout, 2010). The Maine Rural Health Research Center conducted a survey of telemental health programs within Maine. Researchers found that of the 50 programs that participated in the survey, telecommunication is used to conduct medication management (82%), initial diagnostic evaluations (80%), psychotherapy (62%), crisis stabilization (44%), involuntary commitment assessments (28%), substance abuse treatment (26%), and crisis management (26%). The providers in these organizations that utilize telecommunication included psychiatrists (88%), clinical psychologists (44%), clinical social workers (38%), and psychiatric nurse practitioners (30%; Lambert, Gale, Hansen, Croll, & Hartley, 2013).
In 2014, one TMHT provider reported serving 423 individuals in a span of 12 months (Jones, 2014). Online practices are also reporting growing numbers of use (iTherapy, 2014; Virtual Therapy Connect, 2015); however, exact figures are difficult to find. These numbers are expected to grow as more advanced and faster telecommunication infrastructures are built, government funding and promotion persists, and more people become interested in telehealth. Psychologists in telepsychology have a responsibility to provide ethical client care, which includes informing and educating clients about all limitations to TMHT.
Training
Researchers are advocating the use of TMHT services (Bee et al., 2008; Godleski et al., 2012; Wagner et al., 2014), government agencies are promoting it (California Telehealth Network, 2013; Federal Communications Commission, 2015; Health Resources and Services Administration, 2015; National Conference of State Legislatures, 2015; Nebraska Statewide TeleHealth Network, 2006; Northwest Regional Telehealth Resource Center, 2005), and the APA (2013a), among other mental health organizations, has developed ethical guidelines and standards for practice (American Telemedicine Association, 2009, 2013; Ohio Psychological Association, 2010). However, training in the provision of TMHT is relatively limited (Colbow, 2013).
To the authors’ knowledge, there are no APA-accredited programs that offer standalone courses addressing the breadth of ethical, legal, technical, and procedural issues that arise when utilizing TMHT. The APA Office of Program Consultation and Accreditation and the Office of Graduate and Postgraduate Education and Training were contacted regarding course offerings at various APA-accredited programs. Personnel were asked whether they were aware of, had records for, or had knowledge about courses available in APA-accredited programs for technology. No standalone classes were identified (APA, personal communication, June 12, 2015). However, there are several current modes of training and preparation available for TMHT, which include in-person continuing education, online continuing education, and organization-specific training (Colbow, 2013). The in-person continuing education trainings are typically 1 to 2 days in length and include those offered by UC Davis Health System Academic Information Systems, Arizona Telemedicine Program, Alaska Federal Health Care Access Network, and those more recently being offered at APA conventions (i.e., 2015 APA Convention: Telepsychology and Other Technology-Based Best Practices). The online continuing education trainings are typically several days in length and include those offered by the TeleMental Health Institute. The organization-specific trainings are typically several days in length and include those offered by the Veterans Affairs or other TMHT providers such as MyTherapyNet.
Although a number of authors have identified pitfalls associated with telecommunication, such as susceptibility to third-party interception and the ethical and legal boundaries (APA, 2013a; Colbow, 2013; Rummell & Joyce, 2010), only some of the training programs available highlight these in their curricula (e.g., DoD, 2013; TeleMental Health Institute, 2015). Moreover, although some programs recognize certain limitations, none of the educational procedures reviewed by the authors mention the NSA’s data collection process and the potential limitations to confidentiality posed by this organization. Because no nationwide organization exists that specifies educational material that must be covered prior to practicing TMHT, available training programs may not cover critical topics needed to provide clients with the information they could use to decide whether TMHT is the most appropriate treatment. Additionally, there are no instructions for clinicians about how much information to provide clients regarding the possible interception of their private information. Some online therapy providers have terms, policies, and limitations of service material that enumerate the limitations of privacy and confidentiality and the ways in which clients’ protected health information (PHI) is collected and used (i.e., Breakthrough Behavioral, Inc., 2015, shares health information with third-parties without option for opt-out). Also, it is unclear whether clinicians review this information with clients. Moreover, many states and regulatory bodies specify that appropriate steps must be taken by psychologists to assure patient confidentiality (APA, 2013a; American Telemedicine Association, 2013; Ohio Psychological Association, 2010), but do not specify the procedures and steps that must be taken (APA, 2007, 2010; Lustgarten, 2015).
APA’s Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

The APA (2010) Ethics Code was most recently updated to include language explicitly stating that “under no circumstances may this standard be used to justify or defend violating human rights” (p. 4). Yet no changes were made regarding the use of technology in practice (Lustgarten, 2015). In an effort to improve psychologists’ understanding of TMHT and similar technologies, the APA (2013a) released “Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology.” The authors assert that technology usage requires two key components: competence and informed consent. By developing an understanding and having experience with “telecommunication technologies,” psychologists will be practicing in an area of competence (p. 6). Similarly, psychologists are tasked with giving “full understanding” to clients of the risks involved with technology in psychological services (p. 6). Again, this article separates asynchronous and synchronous communication, and focuses on the latter portion of TMHT.
Eight guidelines are specifically outlined to which psychologists should aspire. Of importance for this article are Guidelines 1, 3, 4, and 5. Guideline 1 stresses the importance of competent telecommunication practice. The APA (2013a) recommends gaining experience, participating in educational opportunities, and communicating with informed colleagues. Guideline 3 notes that psychologists provide thorough informed consent in telepsychology. More importantly, the document suggests talking with clients about privacy and security risks associated with treatment via digital means. Guideline 4 explains that psychologists “make reasonable effort” to ensure privacy and confidentiality in technological environments. Essential to protecting client data are security measures such as passwords and encryption to protect against breaches of PHI. Similarly, Guideline 5 explains that various threats to client privacy exist (e.g., viruses, hackers, security flaws, and software bugs). Psychologists are encouraged to conduct risk assessments to prevent unintended data leaks. Threat or risk assessments help prevent unintended disclosures and maintain operational security of client privacy and confidentiality.
Unfortunately, guidelines do not provide psychologists with specific actions, tools, and/or methods to establish commonly accepted competence, enforce privacy and confidentiality, or explain the informed consent process (APA, 2007, 2010, 2013a; Lustgarten, 2015). More specific best practices might alleviate psychologists’ knowledge gaps surrounding TMHT and other telepsychology services. Although the document helps psychologists establish a baseline of ethically competent care when using telepsychology and, more specifically, TMHT, it does not account for current risks to client privacy from governmental entities.
Governmental Threats to Client Privacy

Numerous risks to client confidentiality arise when practicing TMHT. This articles focuses on governmental surveillance programs, as they represent a more tangible threat compared with “hackers.” However, the following information and programs provided also serve as examples of threats to privacy and confidentiality, which could also come from individual and/or collective actors.
Various intelligence agencies are tasked with surveillance, information gathering, and organized aggression toward enemies. One particular organization, the NSA (2011), is responsible for “preventing foreign adversaries from gaining access to sensitive or classified national security information” (para.2). Additionally, the NSA is responsible for collecting, processing, and disseminating foreign intelligence. Their mission is to protect U.S. interests via technological prowess (NSA, 2011). The NSA was originally intended to access information from foreign sources, but the strict separation between foreign and domestic spying has eroded (Greenwald, 2012).
In 2013, a whistleblower named Edward Snowden leaked a cache of top secret, NOFORN (“Not reasonable for foreign nationals”) intelligence documents (Greenwald, 2014). Snowden was an NSA analyst and contractor for Booz Allen Hamilton when he began to collect documents that provided evidence that the U.S. government was collecting information and intelligence from domestic citizens (Greenwald, 2014). On June 6, 2013, Greenwald published the first article from the collection, which was ultimately entitled, “The NSA Files.” The initial article catalogued indiscriminate bulk collection of domestic Verizon customers’ phone records (Greenwald, 2013). Since 2013, information on numerous governmental programs has been published. This section focuses on four major developments from “The NSA Files” that might affect TMHT: PRISM, MUSCULAR, Optic Nerve, and NSLs.
PRISM
The Snowden leaks included information about a covert, top-secret data collection program entitled “PRISM” (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). The Protect America Act of 2007 enabled PRISM to begin data collection (Lee, 2013). The program was catalogued as a PowerPoint presentation, with the first slide reading, “The SIGAD Used Most in NSA Reporting” (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). PRISM aims to collect “audio and video chats, photographs, e-mails, documents, and connection logs” (Gellman & Poitras, 2013, para.1). Presentation slides display when each company entered into the program, which include companies such as Microsoft (including Skype), Yahoo, Google, Facebook, and Apple (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). With each company, PRISM allowed for both real-time and stored collection of data (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). Gellman and Poitras (2013) state that PRISM is not, by definition, a “bulk collection” program, as analysts must enter identifying details to begin collection on targets.
Intended in the pursuit of foreign terrorists/actors that might want to cause harm to U.S. interests, “analysts who use the system from a Web portal at Fort Meade, Md., key in ‘selectors,’ or search terms, that are designed to produce at least 51 percent confidence in a target’s ‘foreignness’” (Gellman & Poitras, 2013, para.30). Reversed, NSA analysts and contractors would have a 49% likelihood of incorrectly targeting a domestic citizen of the U.S. clients “foreignness” may vary across clinical/counseling centers and locations. As practitioners, this may directly affect a client’s suitability for TMHT.
Presentation slides suggest that Microsoft’s Skype videoconferencing software was included for collection in February 2011 (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). Skype is a popular peer-to-peer videoconferencing software for communication and has been used for TMHT (Hoffman, 2011; Pearlman, 2013; Zur, 2014). PRISM slides suggest that Skype collection increased by 248% from 2011 to 2012 (Greenwald & MacAskill, 2013). Intelligence documents suggest that Microsoft modified Skype for easier collection by the NSA (Greenwald, MacAskill, Poitras, Ackerman, & Rushe, 2013). Additionally, a top-secret document entitled “User’s Guide for PRISM Skype Collection” detailed potential exploits (NSA, 2012). The NSA (2012) states that “NSA receives Skype collection via PRISM when one of the peers is a FAA/702 tasked target” (p. 8). That means if one member in a Skype videoconference is “tasked,” both parties’ data, video, audio, and messages are collected synchronously with conversation. Skype does not provide retroactive access to the NSA (2012), as communications are not stored. Collection must have already begun on a tasked target.
MUSCULAR
Data centers at Google and Yahoo were infiltrated by the NSA (Gellman & Soltani, 2013). The program was entitled “MUSCULAR” and found weaknesses in both companies’ private servers (Gellman & Soltani, 2013). Cloud data (e.g., Yahoo Mail, Gmail, Hangouts, and Google Drive) was accessible because of the MUSCULAR exploit (Gellman, Soltani, & Peterson, 2013). The program allowed for millions of files to be collected in a 30-day period (Gellman & Soltani, 2013). Unless psychologists encrypted all e-mails, data, and videoconferences prior to using either service, it is possible that PHI was disclosed in the process (Lustgarten, 2015). Specific to TMHT, Google’s videoconferencing program, Hangouts, may have been compromised. Hangouts is another videoconferencing solution that has been mentioned for TMHT (GrowingSelf, 2015). Unlike Skype, Hangouts is not peer-to-peer. The program uses Google’s servers to establish a connection between individuals. After Snowden documents were published regarding MUSCULAR, Google publicly acknowledged their commitment to encrypt data on servers (Timberg, 2013). Although Hangouts connections are encrypted “in transit,” they are unencrypted within Google’s data centers (Google, 2015). For Google and Yahoo products, psychologists might struggle to understand and explain the current data protections and governmental threats to clients.
Optic Nerve
The Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), a British intelligence agency, and the NSA created a method to collect Yahoo Messenger data in 2008 (Ackerman & Ball, 2014). The program was entitled “Optic Nerve” because it could photograph users every 5 min via webcams. Over 6 months, 1.8 million people were targeted via the program (Ackerman & Ball, 2014). Bulk collection was used to acquire data, regardless of suspected wrongdoing. GCHQ was also attempting to access Microsoft Kinect webcams for bulk collection (Perlroth & Goel, 2014). It is unclear whether other services (e.g., Apple’s FaceTime or Google’s Hangouts) were also compromised via Optic Nerve. Similarly, in an interview with the chief technologist for The Intercept, Micah Lee (personal communication, March 27, 2015) suggested exploits could be used for other videoconferencing providers—especially if data were not encrypted end-to-end.
National Security Letters
Broader in scope, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) issues NSLs to companies for customer data (Electronic Frontier Foundation, 2014; Wexler, 2014). These legal requests are, at times, conducted without the knowledge of those affected (Counterintelligence Access to Telephone Toll and Transactional Records, 2002; Wexler, 2014). Oftentimes providers (e.g., phone companies and Internet Service Providers) cannot publicly disclose or share information with customers about current NSLs. They can limit free speech for companies and clients involved. Investigations conducted track the following example identifiers: name, address, telephone number, e-mail addresses, IP addresses, URLs, activity logs, and banking and credit card information (Electronic Frontier Foundation, 2014). More specifically,
Since data storage is incredibly cheap it’s normal to collect as much data as possible and to retain it indefinitely. So potentially, for example, Google could provide not only all of the e-mails/documents stored in a Google account, but also all the IP addresses the user logged in from and from which devices, etc. (M. Lee, personal communication, March 27, 2015)
Larger companies have asserted that the government should not be able to request information via gagged NSLs (Tsukayama, 2014). Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo all filed court documents to stop NSLs, arguing that they undermined customer privacy and confidence in cloud services (Tsukayama, 2014). As an answer to these concerns, some companies are publishing government requests of user data via transparency reports (i.e., Apple Inc., 2015c; Google, 2016). The larger companies tend to have larger legal teams to pursue these cases and defend customers and publicly acknowledge requests, although newer companies might be more susceptible to government requests (Weisul, 2014; Wexler, 2014). With smaller legal budgets, smaller companies might not have the capital necessary to defend customers and/or appeal aggressive and/or nonspecific searches (Weisul, 2014).
Parties engaging in TMHT will each share personal information if an NSL is conducted. Thus, FBI investigations might be able to secure PHI during TMHT sessions. Psychologists are responsible for informing and protecting client data; however, government use of NSLs might hamper their ability to maintain client privacy (APA, 2010). Psychologists choosing smaller/younger companies over larger companies (e.g., Apple, Google, Yahoo) in an effort to attain greater privacy and security for TMHT should be cautioned.
Ethical Concerns

The last two decades featured exponential technological innovation (Isaacson, 2014). Despite advances, practitioners should consider the risks and liabilities associated with incorporating technology. From one-on-one therapy in an office to TMHT, practitioners must still follow the APA (2010) Ethics Code. Baker and Bufka (2011) contributed a great deal to the field of TMHT, and highlighted particular ethical issues, including “competence, informed consent, and confidentiality” (p. 410). Four years later, new information from Glenn Greenwald (2013) and Edward Snowden necessitates a new review of ethical concerns. There is a paucity of literature considering governmental threats to clients and psychologists’ services (Lustgarten, 2015). Psychologists should not take for granted that “encrypted” and/or “secure” services are appropriate for use with clients. By using new media for psychological service delivery, psychologists may be at greater risk for ethically questionable practice. The following section reviews ethical concerns associated with TMHT by analyzing Principle E and Sections 2, 4, 7, and 10 (APA, 2010).
Clients expect therapy with psychologists to stay private and confidential (Rubanowitz, 1987). Multiple studies have suggested that if protections were threatened, clients would feel disinclined to sharing with psychologists (Donner, VandeCreek, Gonsiorek, & Fisher, 2008; Fisher & Center for Ethical Practice, Inc., 2008). The APA (2010) Ethics Code stresses the importance of privacy and confidentiality throughout the document, but focuses on it in Principle E. This principle emphasizes that clients put trust in providers and expect information to stay private, except for specified threats (e.g., homicidality, suicidality, preventing child/elder abuse). As psychologists increasingly use TMHT and other technological advances, they should consider the appropriateness for certain client populations.
Issues of competence fall under Section 2 of the APA (2010) Ethics Code. Practicing TMHT stresses competence, as it is a new technology and method of practice for psychologists. Additionally, few training opportunities exist within the field. Psychologists are held responsible under Standard 2.01 for practicing “within the boundaries of their competence” (p. 4). Standards of competence have yet to be established. Competence around privacy and security concerns when using software and hardware may threaten psychologists’ ability to deliver services in an ethical manner. Standard 2.03 notes that psychologists must maintain their competence with “ongoing efforts” (p. 5). Similar to 2.01, psychologists may struggle to maintain and gain additional training from within the field. Presently, the APA does not have a privacy officer position as a central resource for practitioners looking to gain and maintain competence.
Section 4 highlights privacy and confidentiality ethics. The APA (2010; 2013a) stresses that ethical culpability and responsibility for client privacy is always with psychologists, regardless of medium. Standard 4.01 explains that psychologists take “reasonable” steps to protect client data (p. 7). To date, the NSA and other government agencies’ programs attempts to access protected information have not been considered for psychology or TMHT. Furthermore, the field of psychology may currently have a gap in client safeguards. Standard 4.02 (in particular, Part C) places the burden on psychologists to explain confidentiality limits to clients within TMHT. If psychologists do not understand all the risks to TMHT, they might not be able to cogently explain the limits to clients. Both PRISM and Optic Nerve allow for surreptitious recording through webcams, thus threatening psychologists’ ability to maintain Standard 4.03 regarding recording. The Ethics Code reads that psychologists obtain permission prior to recording, but government agencies might capture data without psychologists or client knowledge (APA, 2010).
Section 7 of the Ethics Code concentrates on issues of education and training (APA, 2010). Training programs in psychology have a responsibility to prepare psychologists for real-world practice, research, and teaching. Vocationally, psychologists operate in various environments. Increasingly, psychologists are using TMHT to deliver services (Godleski et al., 2012; iTherapy, 2014; Jacobsen & Kohout, 2010; Virtual Therapy Connect, 2015), but no psychology programs teach technology-specific courses (APA, personal communication, June 12, 2015). Standard 7.01 reads that programs will prepare students with “appropriate knowledge” (p. 9). If psychology would like to establish TMHT as a new medium, training programs should consider teaching to that area (Colbow, 2013). Similarly, if psychology training programs do not provide courses in TMHT and related technologies, gaining competence will solely be within continuing education credits, rather than an expectation of doctoral graduates.
Section 10 of the Ethics Code centers on therapy (APA, 2010). In particular, Standard 10.01 clarifies that psychologists have a responsibility to explain the therapy process to clients. From the design of therapy to limits of confidentiality, psychologists are tasked with clearly explaining the benefits and risks—if any—to clients. The technologies and governmental threats mentioned within this article are inherently complicated. Quixotically, informed consent for clients might be hampered if psychologists do not comprehend current governmental threats to privacy.
Best Practices

Both the APA Ethics Code (APA, 2010) and Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (APA, 2013a) underscore that psychologists are responsible for informing and protecting clients, along with gaining/maintaining competence in TMHT. As this burden is placed on psychologists, those practicing TMHT should establish a set of best practices for regular use. The following best practices are meant to be a guide to protecting client data against governmental and undisclosed threats that hamper privacy, confidentiality, and informed consent.
1. Modify, Collaborate on Informed Consent
The APA (2010) Ethics Code emphasizes the role of informed consent for therapy in multiple standards (e.g., Standards 3.10 and 10.01). Psychologists are responsible for clearly explaining TMHT and the risks involved. Because multiple threats to privacy and confidentiality exist, clients should be made aware during this stage of therapy. Informed consent should be a collaborative process—especially within TMHT—as clients’ computers and technology can hamper confidentiality. Susceptibility to privacy breaches within TMHT can occur for any parties involved. Psychologists might want to walk through privacy-boosting measures with clients and ask clients to brainstorm ways to protect themselves. Conducting a risk assessment between psychologist and client would likely bolster security, and possibly rapport. Privacy policies and terms and conditions for third-party videoconferencing software (e.g., Skype, Hangouts, and FaceTime) should be addressed, as these can compromise privacy and confidentiality. Importantly, data retention policies are often outlined in privacy policies and may affect psychologists’ ability to limit data availability and logging of connections (Lustgarten, 2015).
2. Use End-to-End Encrypted Software
End-to-end encryption reduces the risk of unintended data breaches when conducting TMHT by algorithmically protecting the video and message stream. Third-party actors and governments are severely restricted by these defensive actions. For instance, Apple’s FaceTime program encrypts both audio and video end-to-end (Apple Inc., 2015b). If properly configured, end-to-end solutions such as FaceTime only allow senders and receivers to communicate and see transmissions (Apple Inc., 2015b). Importantly, “Apple cannot decrypt the data,” and AES-256 encryption is used for each peer-to-peer device (Apple Inc., 2015b, p. 36). Contrastingly, both Microsoft’s Skype and Google’s Hangouts have weaknesses, despite being advertised as secure videoconferencing. The NSA (2012) created a method for accessing Skype’s peer-to-peer and end-to-end encrypted software. Google Hangouts is not encrypted end-to-end; instead, it is only encrypted in transit (Google, 2015). Regardless of chosen software, psychologists should read companies’ privacy policies and terms and conditions to ascertain protections used for client data. The chief technologist of The Intercept noted the following:
If telemental health products use the internet, then the NSA is probably spying on what they’re doing. Hopefully all of these products use transport encryption, like HTTPS, and it would be even better if they use end-to-end encryption so that not even a hacked server could eavesdrop on these conversations. (M. Lee, personal communication, March 27, 2015)
3. Dedicate a Computer Solely for TMHT
Any computer attached to the Internet increases risk for compromised software and/or hardware. Lustgarten (2015) suggested an air-gapped computer (removed from Internet access) for client data when possible, but TMHT requires a constant Internet connection. To reduce the risk of unintended breaches of confidentiality, both psychologists and clients should consider using computers dedicated for TMHT. For instance, the VA utilizes integrated videoconferencing systems (e.g., Cisco/Tandberg, Polycom, and LifeSize) or DoD-approved plug-and-play webcams and computers to conduct TMHT. Before conducting TMHT, the VA also emphasizes having personnel educated in TMHT provision at both locations, verification of credentialing, memorandums of understanding, and service agreements between locations (DoD, 2013). Most private practitioners and clients will not have access to integrated video teleconferencing systems, DoD-approved equipment, and/or dedicated personnel to assist with technological difficulties due to the prohibitive costs. One remedy is that computers used for TMHT serve as sole-purpose devices. Users of a dedicated TMHT machine should avoid using browsers, downloading extraneous files, clicking on links, and accepting videoconferencing requests from unknown senders, and should always maintaining operating system, antivirus, and relevant software updates. All uses beyond TMHT should be conducted on a separate computer. Clients who follow the same strict guidelines will be better able to protect their privacy and confidentiality.
4. Employ Two-Factor Authentication
Accounts for TMHT services such as Apple’s FaceTime, Google’s Hangouts, and Microsoft’s Skype all require usernames and passwords for use. These passwords protect data from being shared and/or accessed without consent. To further protect data from unintended breaches, users of videoconferencing software for TMHT should enable two-factor authentication when possible. Two-factor authentication adds an additional six-digit token that is randomly changed every 30 s. The token can be texted to a mobile phone (Apple Inc., 2015a) or delivered via Google’s (2014) Authenticator app for Android and iOS. Apple Inc. (2015a), Google (2014), and Microsoft (2013a) all provide opportunities to register and use two-step authentication. Even if an attacker has stolen a username and password, the six-digit token would be necessary to access the account.
5. Advocate for an APA Privacy Officer
Progress within the field of TMHT and psychology is happening swiftly. As such, the APA (2013a) recommends consulting “technology experts” about technology use (p. 15). Unfortunately, what constitutes an expert is unclear, and the process of developing competence is ambiguous. Resources and consultants for knowledge within the field of psychology are limited. Again, to date, no manuscript has evaluated the consequences of “The NSA Files” to the delivery of TMHT (Greenwald, 2013). To help psychologists better protect their clients and reduce risks, the APA should elect a privacy officer to serve as a technological consultant and provider of recent news. Although these authors recognize that the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (1996) regulations do not require nonmedical organizations to elect privacy officers, this legislation could serve as inspiration for the APA to appoint an officer who would disseminate timely privacy notifications to the broader field. Advocating for an APA privacy officer may greatly empower and support both psychologists and their clients as well.
6. Develop Coursework on the Provision of TMHT
There is now enough information available on TMHT that a standalone course could be developed (Colbow, 2013). The present training available from continuing education or organizations outside of the VA offering training appears insufficient for disseminating all of the relevant information needed to conduct TMHT securely. Critical areas of instruction related to the topics discussed in this article could be on equipment and setup, maintaining computer security for practitioners and clients, appropriate client selection, verification of client and practitioner identities, limitations to confidentiality, and informed consent (Colbow, 2013). Another option could be to advocate that the APA develop an online certificate to ensure uniformity of practice. In the meantime, APA-accredited programs could incorporate these topics into other classes currently being taught and offer hands-on experience with these technologies.
Conclusion

The issue of governmental surveillance is complicated and fraught with debate because of the differing needs and responsibilities of parties involved (i.e., psychologists, clients, and government agencies). Federal agencies have asserted the need to have strong surveillance capabilities to protect citizens (Johnson, 2013). Rather than debate the justification of aforementioned programs, these authors intend to bring awareness to questions of professional ethics and develop best practices against nation-state, collective, and individual actors who might affect client work when using TMHT. Importantly, psychologists bear the burden of responsibility to protect clients’ data when implementing TMHT. Unintended breaches in confidentiality may be met with legal penalties as well (Benefield, Ashkanazi, & Rozensky, 2006; Glosoff, Herlihy, Herlihy, & Spence, 1997).
Emerging ethical concerns from governmental surveillance programs have impacted technological protections within psychology (Kaye, 2015). Various APA Ethics Code sections and standards (APA, 2010) are endangered based on published government documents. From competence to privacy and confidentiality to training to informed consent, psychologists’ responsibilities and obligations are challenged when conducting TMHT. The possibility for client harm and ethical violations is directly affected by governmental surveillance techniques. Additionally, training programs are tasked with the obligation of cultivating students to become ethical practitioners and researchers. One-on-one practice is a mainstay of the profession, but despite the burgeoning interest in TMHT, none are known to teach technology-specific courses (APA, personal communication, June 12, 2015). If psychologists are being tasked with using TMHT in everyday practice, training programs might have an ethical obligation to add this area of competence. Furthermore, potential Internet concerns affect all psychologists, as the broader field expresses interest in more digital services (Norcross, Pfund, & Prochaska, 2013).
Privacy and confidentiality will likely continue to be threatened by activities of governmental, collective, and individual actors. By engaging in best practices, psychologists may be able to mitigate and/or prevent unintended breaches and protect client privacy and confidentiality. As mentioned, the APA should establish a privacy officer position to aid psychologists with technology. Exponential advances in technology will continue to be both a burden and boon to the field of psychology, but psychologists must take preventative actions against threats.
Recent legislative initiatives have changed the U.S. government’s ability to access bulk collection data, but to date, the aforementioned programs are likely still in effect (USA FREEDOM Act of 2015). Changes to the legal capabilities of the NSA and other governmental agencies will likely occur. Psychologists should not and cannot be expected to predict these changes or future developments in top secret surveillance programs. As Microsoft (2013b) stated, “There are aspects of this debate that we wish we were able to discuss more freely” (para. 4). With more public understanding and acknowledgment of current activities, clients and psychologists may be better protected from threats to ethical practice. Finally, we believe that with greater transparency and discussion around emerging ethical threats, psychologists will be better able to protect clients, research participants, and their own personal communications.",
"43": "American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) armed service members and veterans have acted bravely and made substantial sacrifices over the course of U.S. history, with the highest per capita service relative to other race and ethnic groups (CEHP Incorporated, Bucholz, Fields, & Roach, 1996). AI/ANs continue to be overrepresented in the U.S. military today: between 2004 and 2014, the U.S. civilian labor market comprised 0.7–1.3% adults aged 18–24 who identified as American Indian or Alaska Native only, compared with 1.4–1.9% enlisted members of the U.S. military (Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Personnel and Readiness, 2014). An analysis by the Heritage Foundation showed that AI/AN military recruits were overrepresented among new enlistees, with recruit-to-population ratios of 2.96 in 2006 and 2.68 in 2007. The next-highest ratio was 1.08 for Black or African American recruits in 2007 (Watkins & Sherk, 2008). Like military recruits, veterans who identify as AI/AN are also overrepresented in the population relative to veterans of other minority races (12% of the adult AI/AN population vs. 11% Black vs. 4% Asian) (U.S. Census Bureau, 2010).
AI/AN veterans experience more serious health issues than many other groups of veterans (e.g., Beals et al., 2002; Koo, Hebenstreit, Madden, Seal, & Maguen, 2015; Koo, Madden, & Maguen, 2015; Luncheon & Zack, 2012). They report poorer quality of life, in terms of physically unhealthy days, than both AI/AN civilians and veterans of other races/ethnicities (Luncheon & Zack, 2012). Compared with male White veterans, male AI/AN veterans have unique patterns of mental health diagnoses, including higher rates of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), depression, and alcohol and drug use disorders (Koo, Hebenstreit, et al., 2015). Findings from the American Indian Vietnam Veterans Project estimated past month prevalence of PTSD at 22% and 25% in male Southwest and Northern Plains veterans, respectively; lifetime prevalence of PTSD reached 45% and 57%, respectively (Beals et al., 2002). The prevalence of PTSD in these populations was substantially higher than in male White veterans (10% past month, 24% lifetime), an effect driven by greater exposure of Southwest and Northern Plains Indians to war-zone stress (Beals et al., 2002). Female AI/AN veterans also endure disparities in mental health. Compared with female White veterans, female AI/AN veterans are 1.6 times more likely to be diagnosed with alcohol use disorder (Koo, Hebenstreit, et al., 2015), but are less likely to use mental health outpatient services (Koo, Madden, et al., 2015). AI/AN veterans residing in tribal communities may find that their environments reinforce mental health disorders. AI/AN populations are approximately twice as likely to report past-year alcohol dependence/abuse, lifetime drug use disorders, serious mental illness, and PTSD relative to the total population, yet they are also more likely to perceive unmet need for mental health care (American Psychiatric Association, 2010; Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration, 2013). Such health disparities in tribal communities have been linked to the historical trauma, oppression and other injustices endured by AI/AN populations (Brave Heart & DeBruyn, 1998). Repeated exposure to trauma can cause harm that is not fully captured by a diagnosis of PTSD (National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2016a).
In addition, many AI/AN veterans struggle to obtain health care after military service. A population-based analysis of honorably discharged veterans aged 18–64 revealed that AI/AN veterans were nearly twice as likely to be uninsured than non-Hispanic White veterans (Johnson, Carlson, & Hearst, 2010). After adjusting for insurance status, AI/AN veterans were also more likely to delay care because of transportation problems, not getting through on the phone, and not obtaining a timely appointment. Many AI/AN veterans are eligible for care from both the Veterans Health Administration in the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the Indian Health Service. Interagency collaboration has improved through the renewed 2010 VA-Indian Health Service Memorandum of Understanding (Indian Health Service & Department of Veterans Affairs, 2010), but qualitative analysis of interviews with rural AI/AN veterans suggests that some fragmentation of care persists at the local level (Kaufman et al., 2016). Fragmented care may be most likely for those who have the greatest need for health care. Dual use of services at both Veterans Health Administration and Indian Health Service facilities is related to greater comorbidity, but not to strategies to improve access to care (e.g., transportation programs, educational outreach), suggesting that medical need is the greatest driver of dual use (Kramer et al., 2011). Dual users of Veterans Health Administration and Indian Health Service health care were more likely to seek behavioral health care from Veterans Health Administration and primary care from Indian Health Service, possibly because of the VA’s history of providing mental health care and the availability of IHS facilities in tribal communities (Kramer et al., 2009). Qualitative research results support AI veterans’ preference for the VA’s mental health and chronic pain care (Kaufman et al., 2016).
Challenges of obtaining health care may be exacerbated by living in sparsely populated areas: Native veterans are nearly four times more likely than non-Native veterans to live in areas categorized as “highly rural” (Kaufman et al., 2013), where primary care facilities are often more than an hour away (West et al., 2010). Two recent studies (Brooks et al., 2015; Kaufman et al., 2013) examining Veterans Health Administration outpatient visits in federal fiscal years 2008 and 2011 revealed complex health care needs among rural Native veterans that set them apart even from other rural veterans. Compared with non-Native rural veterans, Native rural veterans are more likely to deploy to combat areas (7% vs. 4%), serve in the Vietnam Era or later (77% vs. 59%), serve in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom (10% vs. 7%), have a service-connected disability (46% vs. 34%), and lack health insurance (53% vs. 38%). Rural Native veterans are also more likely to have been seen for a mental disorder during their most recent health care visit (14% vs. 7%) (Kaufman et al., 2013), and to have a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), traumatic brain injury, mood disorders, anxiety, and substance addiction (Brooks et al., 2015). Interviews of staff at two Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Centers revealed 25 barriers that staff perceived as impeding delivery of mental health services to American Indian and Hispanic American veterans. Most commonly cited barriers included difficulty discussing personal matters, lack of trust of VA system, an inflexible VA system, and lack of outreach to American Indian and Hispanic American communities (Westermeyer, Canive, Thuras, Chesness, & Thompson, 2002).
Over the last one and one-half decades, we developed a real-time, interactive videoconference delivery model to meet the special mental health care needs of the rural AI/AN Veteran population (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). These American Indian Telemental Health (AITMH) Clinics, a service of the Veterans Health Administration, have evolved with an emphasis on patient-centered care, which parallels the VA’s reaffirmed core values of integrity, commitment, advocacy, respect, and excellence (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2016), and is focused on restoring the Veteran’s trust (U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2015). During the course of their operation, these clinics have demonstrated diagnostic reliability, acceptability to patients, cost-effectiveness, feasibility relative to in-person clinics (Shore et al., 2008; Shore, Brooks, Savin, Manson, & Libby, 2007; Shore & Manson, 2004a, 2004b; Shore, Savin, Orton, Beals, & Manson, 2007), and benefit in terms of clinical outcomes. One study of American Indian veterans who receive services at these telemental health clinics documented trends toward increased use of available services such as outpatient visits (+1 visit/year) while decreasing hospitalizations (−0.5 visits/year; Shore, Brooks, et al., 2012; Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012), suggesting improved treatment and better linkage with available resources. We elaborate on the evaluation of and outcomes associated with this model in our discussion. The clinics have been identified as a Promising Practice by the VA’s Office of Rural Health, and were recognized as a commendable practice “worthy of wider dissemination” by the VA’s Office of Telehealth Services during its internal accreditation process (Darkins, Foster, Anderson, Goldschmidt, & Selvin, 2013).
In this paper we build on administrative and clinical models proffered for American Indian Telemental Health clinics (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012; Shore & Manson, 2005), and present a model of care that has been revised based on 14 years of experience leveraging the strengths of the populations served and addressing barriers to accessing and receiving care. Our purpose is to facilitate evaluation of its effectiveness, to encourage comparison to other models of care, and ultimately, to disseminate the best available mental health care to AI/AN veterans.
A Four-Factor Approach Toward Culturally Centered Mental Health Care

The model of care presented here revolves around rural AI/AN veterans who are in need of mental health care, often but not limited to treatment for PTSD or substance use disorder. It was developed conceptually alongside the patient-centered care model (Institute of Medicine, 2001) that has been prominent over the past decade. The model highlights four components that we have found essential for treatment of AI/AN veterans in rural communities: mental health care, care coordination, technology, and cultural facilitation. Telehealth technology improves access to care; care and benefit coordination meets wider health and service needs; robust mental health care treats complex conditions. Care is dependent on cultural facilitation to build trust, through patient engagement and community outreach, traditional healing, and partnerships with tribes. Figure 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Four-factor approach to mental health care for rural American Indian veterans.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
depicts the relationship among these components.
Mental Health Care
The AITMH clinics have been in operation since April 2002. Fourteen sites, including locations in Alaska, Michigan, South Dakota, Wyoming, Montana, and Oklahoma, have adopted this model or components of it; nine of these sites are currently staffed and managed by Denver-based providers. In general, clinics range from one half day to one day per week dependent on community needs. Since their inception, 2,018 clinics have been held, with a total of approximately 7,500 patient visits, serving over 290 Native veterans. In addition, tracking of contacts with female veterans and veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom began in October 2012. Over this time, 12% (244/2058) and 19% (390/2058) of visits were with female and Operation Enduring Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom veterans, respectively.
Given the complexity of care, and the need to establish trust within a cultural framework for veterans in this population, patient visits tend to last longer than those in traditional VA psychiatry clinics. AI/AN Veteran populations have developed high levels of distrust as an important survival skill (Weaver, 1998), which is reflected among their reasons to initially not trust VA health care providers (Dillard & Manson, 2013). Awareness and understanding of the roots of these concerns have helped AITMH clinicians improve the patient/provider therapeutic alliance.
Starting with European contact, the treatment of American Indians has been compared with that of Holocaust victims, and the trauma inflicted on survivors transmitted over generations (Brave Heart & DeBruyn, 1998). Distrust of the U.S. Government, rooted in earlier genocide, warfare, and disease, has been exacerbated by broken treaties, unjust reservation policies, and boarding schools designed to eradicate Indian culture. Conscious and unconscious racial discrimination against AI/ANs persists today (The Leadership Conference, 2016; Walls, Gonzalez, Gladney, & Onello, 2015). In addition, general distrust of the VA by some veterans (e.g., Carlson, 2016) may be due to a broader mistrust of government or to personal negative experiences with VA. Lack of trust can also be a symptom of PTSD, as it relates to strong negative beliefs about oneself or others (Weathers et al., 2013). Such feelings are compounded by AI/AN military members’ negative experiences with war, racial prejudice from peers, and having perpetrated acts of violence at odds with their traditional spiritual and cultural values (National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, 2016b).
It is not surprising, then, that AI/AN veterans may distrust health care providers within VA, who may serve as reminders of historic abuses by Western medicine (Dillard & Manson, 2013; Satcher, 2001), as well as symbols of the U.S. Government, the military, and VA. The term “system transference” has been used to describe the way that past experience with a system (e.g., VA or other federal agencies) shapes impressions of individuals later encountered as representatives of the same system (e.g., providers) (Shore, Savin, Novins, & Manson, 2006). Positive interactions with the health care system beget more trust and optimism; whereas negative experiences exacerbate distrust and pessimism. This is evident at the level of the community as well as individual.
To manage system transference, the AITMH clinicians are taught to acknowledge past issues and problems without excuses, rationalization, or blame. They are expected to listen to the patient’s concerns about the current system, and to address issues within their reach, but to maintain a realistic perspective about the extent of their control, and to avoid overpromising. For example, before making a commitment to a Veteran, our clinicians are encouraged to first verify their ability to link patients to additional information or to connect them to other, relevant services. Most importantly, they honor verbal commitments and communicate to the Veteran their actions on his or her behalf, keeping him/her apprised of progress or challenges in supporting his or her navigation of wider system issues.
Providing the Veteran with a single point of contact for VA mental health services has also helped to establish and maintain trust (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). We recruit clinicians with prior Veteran, VA, or cross-cultural experience through a local network of providers. Prior to working in the AITMH clinics, they train in American Indian cultural issues, and visit tribal communities (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). Each Veteran is cared for by one clinician, who meets regularly with him/her, guides therapy, prescribes medications, and coordinates other services as needed. Clinicians also establish long-term relationships with patients. Our current four clinicians have staffed the clinics since their inception. In addition, as often as possible, clinicians personally visit the AITMH sites. These visits connect them to local community events and to local community culture, resources, and issues. Clinicians also attend VA’s Tribal Veterans Representative training (see Care Coordination), offered at least once per year. Participating in these activities deepens their understanding of the tribes they serve, as well as introduces them to more global issues that impact AI/AN communities. The AITMH clinicians foster openness to continued learning about AI/AN history, about tribal traditions as well as culture, and recognize that, as is true for any individual, the beliefs held by their patients vary within the culture of their community.
Veteran care has to include the capacity to treat complex, chronic conditions. We previously described key components of the clinic model described here (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). Briefly, clinicians guide patients through engagement, education, evidence-based therapy, and medication. Our providers hold a doctor of medicine or nurse practitioner degree and are able to diagnose, treat, and prescribe medications. Clinicians play a critical role in working with the Veteran and Tribal Outreach Worker (TOW, described later) to facilitate wider support for and receipt of services specific to their health care needs. These services include not only other forms of mental health treatment, but medical care and access to traditional healing/medicine systems, as appropriate. Veterans may choose to integrate Western treatment approaches with cultural elements (e.g., traditional healing), another important service facilitated by the provider (see Cultural Facilitation).
The AITMH clinics also consider environmental issues that impact their patients. Important examples of this include anticipating stressors such as community deaths, which often occur at a higher rate in Native communities (Indian Health Service, 2016). Interpersonal conflicts and resource challenges are also frequent stressors among AI/AN veterans and frequently reinforce PTSD symptoms, particularly vigilance against threats and reminders of past military traumas. Conversely, we leverage strong family and community cohesion, which is highly prized by many rural AI/ANs, even more than their non-AI/AN rural counterparts (Ulrich-Schad, 2013), to optimize patient care, when possible and appropriate. Consultations with family members enhance the clinicians’ understanding of the treatment environment. For example, providers might advise family members on how to provide emotional support, assist medication compliance, or enable behavioral change. Some families also support patients logistically, by transporting them, scheduling their appointments, or promoting their engagement in community events.
Records of clinic visits suggest increased periods of risk around certain times of the year such as the 4th of July, or the holiday season, when events evoke memories of military service, which can, in turn, trigger PTSD symptoms. The AITMH clinics respond with increased appointment availability as well as outreach to veterans who have previously experienced symptom increase during these times of year.
Technology
Videoconference technology is a key element of the AITMH clinical service model. Rural Native veterans seeking in-person care at the nearest local VA clinic often need to travel each way from 3–4 hours, under normal weather conditions. Winter and storm weather double or triple this time, or preclude travel. As a consequence, such distances challenge continuity of care. Travel time to AITMH clinic sites is in the range of 15 to 60 min, although some veterans travel longer, rendering regular appointments more practical. In addition, providing therapy and other mental health care in AI/AN communities facilitates the veteran’s connection to treatment in a familiar environment, which often improves comfort with help-seeking and maximizes care options.
Videoconferencing between clinicians in Denver, CO and each of the nine current rural sites is provided either through direct connections with the VA network or using network-to-network connectivity between the VA and the Indian Health Service. Veterans who receive mental health care use video screens with cameras and monitors housed in private, secure rooms located in Tribal Health Care Facilities, Indian Health Service facilities or VA Community Based Outreach Clinics (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). During treatment sessions clinicians use computers with cameras and monitors or video monitors housed either at the Centers for American Indian and Alaska Native Health on the University of Colorado’s Anschutz Medical Campus or at the Denver VA (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). The clinics participate in the VA’s Office of Telehealth Services quality management program and have been reviewed under its conditions of participation process (Darkins et al., 2013).
Although connections and equipment have generally worked well, at times technology issues have created major challenges for these services. Barriers in the natural environment can compromise reliable, efficient operation. Indeed, all the equipment at one site was once lost in a natural disaster. When equipment fails, it can be slow to replace or to address network connectivity issues. The resolution of technical issues requires teams to work remotely across systems. Close communication with VA’s information technology services, and clear delineation of roles in the event of technical failure, have reduced gaps in service. Clinicians have also adapted to maintain services in the event of technical failures. For example, clinicians visit with patients via telephone when technical problems occur. Despite technical challenges, the AITMH clinics are well-received by patients (Shore et al., 2008) and by individuals with professional ties to the clinics. Many of the latter expressed initial skepticism about the clinics, but became advocates after observing supportive feedback from patients and staff and timely adaptation by clinics to suggestions for improvement (Brooks, Manson, Bair, Dailey, & Shore, 2012). Patients often attributed their positive perceptions of the clinics to the trust garnered by TOWs (see Care Coordination).
Care Coordination
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1943) offers a useful rubric by which to prioritize the needs of veterans with complex conditions. For example, it is difficult for an individual to focus on PTSD treatment if s/he is worried about being able to sleep and eat. Available data suggest that AI/AN veterans are overrepresented among homeless veterans. AI/AN veterans represent 2.5% of sheltered homeless veterans versus 0.7% of all veterans (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, & National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans, 2011). Additionally, the conceptualization of homelessness may be different in AI/AN communities, leading to underrepresentation and inadequate appreciation of this problem (Housing Assistance Council & Center for Supportive Housing, 2013). Some patients may struggle with employment and food security, especially if their disabilities prevent regular or meaningful work. Therapeutic progress and medication compliance are likely to lag until basic needs can be fulfilled.
Complex medical needs require greater care coordination across different health care providers and systems. Such coordination is central to the model of the AITMH clinics. In addition to connecting veterans with VA sources of care through electronic medical records and referrals, clinicians and staff must be resourceful in linking veterans to tribal, local, state, and federal resources, which include but also extend beyond the realm of health care. The Tribal/Telehealth Outreach Worker (TOW) at each clinic is key to facilitating this connection (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). The TOW, a VA employee, plays a central role across all four dimensions of the care model. Each day of clinic operation, the TOW opens the clinic, activates the telehealth equipment, and secures the office space. S/he greets patients, schedules appointments, makes reminder calls, and provides on-site assistance to help patients operate equipment. Each TOW is trained in emergency management protocols and ensures that patients know how to obtain care in a medical or psychiatric emergency. Training in protecting patient confidentiality is an important part of establishing the patient’s trust of the TOW, who often belongs to the same community.
Most TOWs—themselves veterans or relatives of veterans—genuinely understand veterans’ needs in the context of their tribal communities. All TOWs receive training in VA services and benefits through the VA’s Tribal Veterans Representative program (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012). This training provides TOWs the knowledge to help veterans enroll in the VA system and to assist care coordination by navigating other VA benefits and services, as needed. TOWs often belong to many organizations within their communities. Their community connections enable them to facilitate contact and to collaborate with local traditional healing resources (see Cultural Facilitation).
Other community members also facilitate care coordination. TOWs participate in the VA’s Tribal Veterans Representative (TVR) training. TVRs are volunteers specifically trained to improve veterans’ access to benefits and services by helping veterans navigate the VA system (Kaufmann, Richardson, Floyd, & Shore, 2014). TVR trainings offer practical guidance on engaging veterans, and completing enrollment as well as VA benefit claims paperwork. They provide a forum for new and experienced TVRs to network, to share effective practices, and to problem-solve. Like TOWs, TVRs are largely veterans and tribal members who not only assist patients in care coordination, but who also function more widely in the community to support their access to benefits. Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Comparison of Tribal Outreach Worker (TOW) and Tribal Veterans Representative (TVR) Roles
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
compares their respective roles. Many TOWs function in dual roles. At times, the TOW may refer a patient to a more experienced TVR for assistance with VA benefits and services beyond what they are able to offer. Veterans who distrust government organizations may prefer to seek support from a volunteer TVR, a non-VA employee, who has been selected by tribal leaders to be trained in serving local veterans. Together the TOW and the TVR ensure that veterans requiring additional benefits have access to competent support.
Sharing information among the veteran, TOW, and clinician promotes access to appropriate services, whether at Veterans Health Administration or Indian Health Service sites, and the resolution of care fragmentation that often plagues dual use of health care systems. TVR training teaches clinicians, TOWs, and TVRs about other VA, federal, and tribal resources that can be leveraged for their patients. The use of electronic medical records technology across the Veterans Health Administration can also bridge gaps in physical distance and reduce fragmentation of health care within VA. Clinicians in the AITMH clinics access the VA’s electronic medical record system and receive alerts when their clients have been hospitalized, enabling timely follow-up and medication management. Systems-wide electronic medical records benefit veterans with complex conditions that require coordination across multiple providers.
Cultural Facilitation
Cultural facilitation is a unifying factor in the AITMH model of care and is addressed throughout the course of patient engagement and treatment. AI/AN communities promote respect and honoring of veterans and military services, value spirituality equally with mental and physical health, and rely on close and supportive family networks. Through partnerships with TOWs and traditional healing practices, we leverage these community assets to reach out to and engage veterans in culturally acceptable ways and to provide a more holistic approach to care.
The most important function of the TOWs, as their title indicates, is to engage through community outreach. TOWs identify and contact tribal veterans in their respective communities, and often travel to residences or to public settings to advise veterans and family members about the AITMH clinics and other available VA services. They also reach out to veterans perceived by local contacts (e.g., formal and informal tribal leaders) in need of mental health care. In addition to engaging individual veterans and family members, TOWs operate at the community level to connect with local or tribal veterans’ agencies and organizations (e.g., The American Legion, Veteran Warrior Society) on behalf of the AITMH clinics.
The AITMH clinicians rely on the TOWs to learn more about community and cultural issues. TOWs inform providers about community events that may affect clinic operation (e.g., holidays), as well as events (e.g., celebrations, losses) that may have an emotional impact on the community and patients. TOWs undergird the partnership between the AITMH clinics and tribal communities by supporting liaisons between tribal leaders and clinicians once the clinic is established and operations have begun. They arrange for clinicians to attend community events to further outreach and to deepen their understanding of local cultures.
Some patients choose to incorporate traditional healing into their treatment, including sweat lodges, smudging, and talking circles (Gone, 2010; Lyon, 1998; Owen, 2014). The United Nations and the World Health Organization support traditional health systems as crucial to the individual and communal exercise of self-determination, which in turn has been found to be related to better health (United Nations Department of Economic & Social Affairs, 2009). The Pan American Health Organization now urges member states to involve indigenous peoples in the development of health goals and policies and to “promote the training, education, and leadership development of indigenous healers” (Pan American Health Organization, 2006). Consistent with our previous suggestions to consider integrating traditional healing into psychiatric practice (Shore, Richardson, Bair, & Manson, 2015), the AITMH clinics and providers build referral networks and pathways to traditional healers for the interested patient. Veterans ultimately decide whether to incorporate traditional healing into their care; yet, the mental health model of care should facilitate connections with traditional healers as appropriate. The AITMH clinicians learn about traditional healing, for example through educational materials and workshops. They also work with TOWs and TVRs to identify traditional healers willing to collaborate with and to educate Western medical professionals. Clinicians can more accurately determine whether to raise the subject of traditional healing with a patient if they understand healing practices at the local level. As noted earlier, referrals to a primary care physician can mitigate the medical risks of practices such as sweat lodge ceremonies. Building the capacity to integrate mental health care and traditional healing is complex; it requires openness and acceptance by all participants. Regardless, such an undertaking stimulates conversation with the community that enhances the cultural competence of the clinicians and the VA, and facilitates the delivery of comprehensive care to veterans.
Veterans also choose whether to include family members in the process of educating about their conditions. Consequently, we encourage them to bring family members and friends to the clinics for education about veteran health care needs and services, as well as to devise plans to best support their veteran (see also Mental Health Care).
Conclusion

Over our one and one-half decades of experience in developing and expanding these AITMH clinics, we have refined a model of veteran patient care that turns on cultural facilitation, technology, mental health care, and care coordination. Wider dissemination of the AITMH clinics to other rural Native communities and beyond will likely depend on carefully translating each of these factors into locally meaningful terms. Precisely how each of these factors is achieved must be carefully aligned with the needs of the individual patient, the health care system, and the tribes served. This model underscores the importance of understanding the issues—historical and contemporary—that affect AI/ANs today, the cultural beliefs that shape views of and approaches to telemental health care (Yellowlees, Marks, Hilty, & Shore, 2008), as well as focusing care on the individual patient, recognizing the complexities in each patient’s relationship with his or her culture, and the value of universal principles that revolve around respect (Epner & Baile, 2012).
Each factor outlined in this model confronts known barriers to AI/AN veterans’ treatment. The model increases the flexibility of care offered by the VA system through creative use of technology, incorporation of cultural and spiritual elements of care, and leveraging TOWs and TVRs to reach veterans and to connect them with the VA system. Technology and cultural facilitation improve access to mental health care for these high-risk, isolated veterans who suffer high rates of mental health disorders related to military service and who otherwise might not have ready access to mental health services. Our approach recognizes the roots of distrust between the veteran and systems of care and takes steps toward restoring hope and confidence. The care coordination component addresses such barriers as lack of health insurance, homelessness, poor health, and service discontinuities between the VA and IHS. Despite these efforts, stressors related to resource deprivation like housing remain (Kaufman et al., 2016) and may impede the effective treatment of mental health disorders. But AI/AN communities embody many assets that can be brought to bear on the process of care (Kaufman et al., 2016; Ulrich-Schad, 2013), which explains in part why our reliance on TOWs and TVRs to engage and assist veterans has been successful.
The limitations of this model spring from the relatively resource- and time-intensive demands to appropriately develop, adapt, and implement the services in question. Relationship building, both with individual veterans and the communities in which they live, takes time. This may limit wider dissemination outside of federal health care systems, especially health care systems driven by direct fee-for-service funding. We do not know the level and extent to which this model can be generalized to other veteran groups, nonveteran Native populations, or rural populations. Several clinical and administrative components of the model have been evaluated during implementation. As described earlier, a retrospective chart review revealed trends toward increased use of outpatient services and decreased use of inpatient services (Shore, Brooks, et al., 2012). A randomized crossover trial of 53 AI veterans established diagnostic reliability of assessing commonly occurring disorders in this population, and revealed similarities between face-to-face and videoconference modalities in diagnosing anxious-misery disorders, PTSD, panic disorders, and most substance use and abuse disorders (Shore, Savin, et al., 2007). Only past-year substance dependence and combined abuse/dependence diagnoses differed significantly across modalities. Another crossover trial found similarities between in-person and telemental health interviews in terms of patient satisfaction, usability, cultural competence, and patient/provider interaction (Shore et al., 2008). Patients’ positive perceptions of the telemental health clinics are largely corroborated by findings from a retrospective survey of staff and stakeholders (Brooks et al., 2012). Comparisons of direct operational costs of in-person versus telemental health clinics showed that although both new and established clinics cost more to operate in 2003 (+$1,800 and +$6,000, respectively), they cost less in 2005 (−$7,900 and −$12,200, respectively) (Shore, Brooks, et al., 2007). Reductions in direct costs were due to a drop in market prices in transmission and reconfiguring videoconferencing to eliminate port fees, reductions that have remained since 2005. An earlier case report explored the feasibility of implementing clinics, identifying some problems with travel to telemental health clinic sites but overall positive feedback on patient surveys, including quality of the video connection, comfort with the video connection, and the relationship with the provider (Shore & Manson, 2004b). Another case study reported one patient’s reductions in PTSD symptoms with telemental health treatment at an AITMH clinic (Shore & Manson, 2004a). Throughout the evolution of the AITMH clinics, clinical and administrative lessons have been documented (e.g., Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012; Shore & Manson, 2005; Shore et al., 2006). Although a number of studies have been conducted on these clinics and their evolving model of care (Shore, Kaufmann, et al., 2012), further systematic inquiry, focused on health outcomes, is needed to better demonstrate their real-world effectiveness.
By presenting this model of care for rural AI/AN veterans, we hope to encourage evaluation of its effectiveness, sustainability, and appropriateness for broader dissemination. A critical next step will be to select measureable, testable key performance indicators, including measures to evaluate broader forms of treatment like care coordination and cultural facilitation. Examining community-level outcomes will help us better determine the model’s reach. Ultimately, comparing the model described here to other models of care in underserved populations with chronic and complex health conditions will aid refinement and optimization of the approach.",
"44": "Disruptive behavior disorders (DBDs) are among the most common disorders affecting young children (e.g., Egger & Angold, 2006), and when left untreated, are associated with complex and intractable trajectories over time (e.g., Lavigne et al., 2001). Guidelines suggest that psychosocial interventions, when available, should constitute first-line treatment (Comer et al., 2013; Eyberg et al., 2008). Behavioral parent training, in particular, has shown the strongest support (Comer et al., 2013; Eyberg et al., 2008; Kaminski et al., 2008). parent–child interaction therapy (PCIT; Eyberg & Funderburg, 2011) is one such supported parent-training program. Throughout treatment, parents practice positive attending and effective discipline while the therapist monitors family interactions from behind a one-way mirror and provides live coaching via a parent-worn bug-in-the-ear device.
Despite treatment advances, barriers interfere with proper service access. Regional professional workforce shortages in mental health care impinge on the availability of services (Comer & Barlow, 2014). Transportation barriers and stigma-related concerns about going to a mental health facility (Owens et al., 2002) further limit the accessibility and acceptability of clinic-based services. Remote technologies are increasingly being leveraged to expand the reach and scope of children’s mental health care, given their potential to overcome traditional barriers to services and promote skill generalization by extending skill engagement beyond brick-and-mortar sessions (Comer & Barlow, 2014; Jones et al., 2013; Kazdin & Blase, 2011). However, applications to early child DBDs have been limited. To date, controlled evaluations in this area have only involved hybrid models that conduct most parent training in person, despite other treatment components being conducted remotely (Jones et al., 2014; Myers et al., 2015). Such programs are not fully liberated from the geographical obstacles that hinder service accessibility for many.
Comer and colleagues (2015) have suggested that PCIT may be particularly amenable to a videoteleconferencing (VTC) format, given that, by design, the PCIT therapist is not in the same room as the family for most of the treatment, but rather is remotely monitoring from another room and providing real-time feedback to parent(s) via a parent-worn bug-in-the-ear device. With VTC, therapists can remotely provide in-the-moment feedback during parent–child interactions in the home, regardless of a family’s geographic proximity to a mental health clinic. Such Internet-delivered PCIT (I-PCIT) can afford a comparable quantity of therapist contact relative to standard, clinic-based PCIT. Moreover, treating families in homes may enhance the ecological validity of treatment by providing parent coaching in the very settings in which child behaviors are most problematic. VTC platforms are being increasingly used to remotely provide full courses of real-time treatment in the home for a number of clinical populations (e.g., Comer et al., 2017), although applications to early DBDs are limited.
This is the first randomized trial evaluating VTC to offer fully remote behavioral parent training with a live therapist. Three–five-year olds with DBDs were randomly assigned to receive either I-PCIT or standard clinic-based PCIT. We hypothesized that I-PCIT would: (a) be associated with productive engagement and high treatment satisfaction; and (b) yield significant improvements maintained across a 6-month follow-up period. We further predicted that I-PCIT and standard clinic-based PCIT would yield similar outcome trajectories and response rates across time.
Method

Participants
Racially/ethnically diverse participants were 40 children ages 3–5 with a DBD defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed.; DSM–IV; APA, 1994) and their caregiver(s). Table 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of Study Participants
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents eligibility criteria and sample characteristics.
Measures
Assessments included independent evaluator ratings and diagnoses, and parent reports on questionnaires evaluating (a) child diagnostic outcomes, (b) global severity, impairment and functioning, (c) disruptive behavior symptoms, (d) caregiver burden, (e) barriers to treatment, and (f) treatment satisfaction. Table 2
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 2. Overview of Included Measures
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents a summary and description of measures included.
Treatments
PCIT (Eyberg & Funderburg, 2011) is a well-established, clinic-based, behavioral parent-training program for young children that places central emphasis on improving parent–child interaction patterns and the quality of parent–child relationships. PCIT draws on attachment and social learning theories to emphasize positive attention, consistency, problem-solving, and communication. Parents first learn to build a positive and rewarding parent–child relationship via positive attending skills and differential reinforcement, and then learn effective discipline strategies and time-out procedures. The precise length of PCIT for a given family is titrated to the quickness with which the family achieves mastery criteria. A distinguishing feature of PCIT is the use of in-session parent coaching. The therapist monitors the family from behind a one-way mirror and provides live and individualized coaching through a parent-worn bug-in-the-ear device.
I-PCIT (Comer et al., 2015) follows traditional clinic-based PCIT, but uses a VTC platform to enable therapists to remotely deliver treatment to families in their homes. Instead of interacting in front of a one-way mirror at a clinic, families use a webcam to broadcast home-based interactions to their therapists, who remotely provide live coaching through a parent-worn Bluetooth earpiece. Technological, administrative, security, and hardware considerations for telemental health care are considered elsewhere (Chou et al., 2016; Comer et al., 2015).
Procedure and Data Analysis
Procedures were approved by the Florida International University and Boston University institutional review boards and informed consent was obtained for all families. Participants were recruited from the flow of families seeking treatment for child-behavior problems at one of two university-affiliated clinics in [Miami, FL and Boston, MA]. Independent evaluators (IEs) masked to treatment condition conducted Kiddie-Disruptive Behavior Disorder Schedule (K-DBDS; Keenan, Wakschlag, & Danis, 2001) diagnostic interviews, and generated Clinical Global Impressions (CGI; Guy & Bonato, 1970) and Children’s Global Assessment Scale (CGAS; Shaffer et al., 1983) scores, at baseline, posttreatment, and 6-month follow-up. Diagnostic interviews were conducted in the clinic, regardless of treatment condition, to maintain the masked study design. Caregivers also completed parent-report forms at baseline, midtreatment, posttreatment, and 6-month follow-up online through a secure and encrypted Web-survey application. Families received $40 for each evaluation. Services were provided at no cost. To standardize care across I-PCIT participants, I-PCIT families were provided with a temporary equipment kit for the duration of their participation (∼$150; see Comer et al., 2015). Therapists (n = 9; seven women, two men; 22.2% ethnic/racial minority status) were clinical psychology trainees who completed yearly intensive didactic training with a PCIT master trainer, followed by cotreatment roles on two cases. Therapists self-completed session-integrity checklists, and session recordings were reviewed during weekly supervision with a clinical psychologist. The same therapists delivered treatment across conditions, and supervision groups simultaneously provided supervision for Internet and clinic-based cases. The lead supervisor also selected 36 random sessions (5% of the total 719 sessions conducted across the study) and completed independent treatment-integrity checks; treatment integrity was high (88%). IEs met internal certification and reliability procedures, developed with the K-DBDS lead author. IEs presented interview results to supervision and diagnoses and CGI/CGAS scores were collaboratively generated.
Analyses were conducted on the intent-to-treat sample (N = 40). Baseline differences between groups were evaluated using t and χ2 tests, and linear regressions controlling for site and therapist-evaluated differences in treatment satisfaction and treatment barriers across groups. Hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) was conducted to model the nonindependence of data due to nesting of repeated observations (Level 1) within children (Level 2), using maximum-likelihood estimation of parameters to account for missing data (0% of data were missing at baseline; 12.5% at posttreatment; 32.5% at follow-up). HLM mixed-effects models accounted for missing data and used the data from the full intent-to-treat sample. For each HLM, treatment group, study site, therapist, the natural log (ln) of time (weeks since baseline), and the Group × ln(Time) interaction were fixed-effect predictors, and the intercept (scaled to the baseline assessment; i.e., time = 0) was the single random effect (allowing individuals to vary in their mean-outcome values). The MIXED procedure in SPSS 21 was used for mixed model analyses. Fitted models were used to calculate estimated mean scores at each time point. Clinical significance was evaluated with between- and within-subjects effect sizes (d), as well as by examining rates of posttreatment and follow-up treatment response (CGI-Improvement = 1 or 2), excellent response (CGI-Improvement = 1), diagnostic response to baseline principal diagnosis, and diagnostic response to all DBDs. Intent-to-treat analyses on responder rates were based on an assumption that cases of posttreatment or follow-up missing data were not responders. For each responder type, binomial logistic regressions (controlling for site and therapist) examined whether condition predicted response rate.
Results

Figure 1
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 1. Flow of participants across study phases.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents the participant flow throughout the study. There were no significant differences in age, sex, race/ethnicity, income, or baseline child-behavior problems between families who did and did not participate in post/follow-up assessments. Treatment retention was high, with 70% of families in each condition completing their full treatment course. Among families completing treatment, the mean number of sessions until achieving PCIT mastery criteria was 21.2 (SD = 7.4); number of sessions did not differ across conditions (MInternet = 21.7 vs. MClinic = 20.8), t(26) = 0.35, p = .73. Treatment satisfaction was high across both conditions, as rated on the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-8; Larsen et al., 1979; MInternet = 30.1 vs. MClinic = 28.5; highest possible score = 32) and the Therapy Attitude Inventory (TAI; Brestan et al., 1999; MInternet = 45.9 vs. MClinic = 45.1; highest possible score = 50). Treatment condition did not predict posttreatment, CSQ-8 F(3, 29) = .71, p = .50; βCondition = −1.63, p = .25, or TAI scores F(3, 29) = 1.57, p = .23; βCondition = −1.23, p = .48. I-PCIT was associated with fewer barriers to treatment participation than clinic-based PCIT, F(3, 29) = 7.62, p < .001; βCondition = 8.40, p = .01, MInternet = 50.1 versus MClinic = 58.5.
Treatment Outcomes Across Time
Table 3
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 3. Child Outcomes Across Assessment Points, by Condition
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents actual means and model-estimated means for outcomes across assessment points, by treatment condition, and Table 4
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 4. Results of Mixed-Effects Models Examining the Effects of Condition, Time, and Their Interactions
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents HLM results examining the effects (controlling for site and therapist) of time, condition, and their interactions on outcomes. For child-behavior problems and burden to caregivers, there was a significant effect of time (see Table 4). Specifically, across conditions, Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Pincus, 1999) Intensity, Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL; Achenbach & Rescorla, 2000) Externalizing, and ECBI Problem scores significantly improved across time. Change leveled off somewhat between posttreatment and follow-up. Figure 2
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Figure 2. Trajectories of change across weeks, by treatment condition, for scores on the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). Average timing of the midtreatment evaluation = 17.2 weeks postbaseline; average timing of posttreatment evaluation = 35.2 weeks postbaseline; average timing of the follow-up evaluation = 56.9 weeks postbaseline. The general curvilinear shape of change depicted here for ECBI Intensity scores was comparable for CBCL (Achenbach, & Rescorla, 2000) Externalizing scores and ECBI Problem scores.
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
presents the symptom trajectory, by treatment condition, for ECBI Intensity scores; the general trajectory shape depicted was also comparable across CBCL Externalizing and ECBI Problem scores. Across these three outcomes, there were no significant interaction effects of Time×Condition. In contrast, across conditions, global severity and functioning (CGI-Severity; Guy & Bonato, 1970 and CGAS; Shaffer et al., 1983, respectively) did not improve across time (see Table 4).
Clinical Significance
Table 5
TABLES AND FIGURES
table/figure thumbnail
Table 5. Clinical Significance of Child Outcomes at Posttreatment and at 6-Month Follow-Up
View larger image > in this page > in new window
> Download slide
(top) presents within-subjects effect sizes (d) across outcomes, by treatment condition. Effects for child-behavior problems and burden to caregivers from pre-to-post and from pre-to-follow-up were all “large” to “very large” (Cohen, 1988; Sawilowsky, 2009) for I-PCIT and “medium” to “very large” for clinic-based PCIT. Nonsignificant between-groups effects were relatively negligible in magnitude (see Table 5, middle). Among children who completed a full course of treatment (n = 28), 85.7% of I-PCIT children and 78.6% of clinic-based PCIT children were treatment responders (i.e., CGI-Improvement = 1 or 2) at posttreatment; 83.3% of I-PCIT treatment completers and 72.7% of clinic-based PCIT treatment completers were treatment responders at follow-up. Moreover, among children who completed a full course of treatment, 50% of I-PCIT children and 17.6% of clinic-based PCIT children were “excellent responders” (i.e., CGI-Improvement = 1) at posttreatment; 33.3% of I-PCIT treatment completers and 25.0% of clinic-based PCIT treatment completers were “excellent responders” at follow-up. Responder rates for intent-to-treat analyses found strong treatment response rates at posttreatment across conditions and somewhat lower response rates at follow-up (see Table 5, bottom). Diagnostic response rates are also presented in Table 5 (bottom). The rate of posttreatment excellent response (CGI-Improvement = 1) was significantly higher in I-PCIT than in clinic-based PCIT (see Table 5, bottom). Other response rates were equivalent across conditions.
Discussion

The present study provides the first evidence from a controlled trial supporting the use of real-time VTC to remotely deliver behavioral parent training to the home setting. After treatment, intent-to-treat analyses found that 70% of children treated with I-PCIT showed treatment response, and at 6-month follow-up, 55% continued to show treatment response. Further, roughly half of the children treated with I-PCIT no longer met criteria for a DBD at posttreatment or at 6-month follow-up. The effects of I-PCIT on children’s symptoms and burden to parents were large-to-very-large in magnitude, and important to note, these outcomes and symptom trajectories were comparable to those observed in children randomized to standard clinic-based PCIT. Of note, the rate of excellent response at posttreatment was significantly higher in youth treated with I-PCIT relative to those treated with clinic-based PCIT, and parents treated with I-PCIT perceived fewer barriers to their treatment participation than parents treated with clinic-based PCIT. These findings build on the small but growing literature supporting the promising role of remote technologies for expanding the delivery of behavioral parent training (Jones et al., 2014; Kirkman et al., 2016; Myers et al., 2015), and add to broader efforts leveraging new technologies to expand the reach and scope of indicated mental health care (Comer & Barlow, 2014; Kazdin & Blase, 2011).
Relative to other evaluated technology-based programs that incorporate real-time behavioral parent training, I-PCIT is novel in its use of VTC to remotely deliver all parent training components. Indeed, I-PCIT is fully liberated from the geographical constraints that limit the accessibility of hybrid models forming the basis of much of the behavioral parent training in the clinic. Important to note, in addition to positive child outcomes, we found I-PCIT to be associated with high engagement and treatment satisfaction, and reduced perceived barriers to participation relative to clinic-based PCIT. With continued support in geographically diverse populations, I-PCIT may play an important role in overcoming geographic barriers to care for those living in rural, remote, or otherwise underserved regions characterized by limited local treatment options. For those in regions with access to quality care, research is needed to examine the relative merits of emerging technology-based treatment options to identify for whom technology-enhanced treatments might best be suited (i.e., technology could be used to extend in-session content beyond the treatment hour (as Jones et al., 2014 suggested) versus telemental health formats like I-PCIT in which all of the treatment is conducted remotely in real time. Moreover, the present findings that, (a) the rate of posttreatment excellent response was significantly higher among youth treated with I-PCIT than clinic-based PCIT, and (b) I-PCIT was associated with fewer parent-perceived barriers to participation than clinic-based PCIT, underscore the important role I-PCIT can play, even in regions with access to quality clinic-based parent training.
Of note, although I-PCIT may address geographic disparities, the reliance on live sessions with a provider means that I-PCIT alone cannot solve broader mental health-care workforce-power problems (Kazdin & Blase, 2011). Even after addressing geographic workforce disparities, there is still an enormous discrepancy between the large numbers of individuals in need of care and the relatively small numbers of providers delivering care. Lower intensity, technology-based treatment options are needed to buttress real-time technology-based treatments. Self-administered e-health programs that have parents watch recorded parent-training modules have shown initial promise in open trials (Kirkman et al., 2016), sometimes with additional telephone-based support (Sourander et al., 2016). Such approaches will likely play an important role in stepped-care models that reserve higher intensity treatments requiring extensive provider time for more severe cases.
Study limitations merit comment. First, the sample size in this initial trial of VTC methods for remotely delivering parent training to the home may have been underpowered to detect between-groups differences, although within-subjects analyses did yield significant and sizable results and significant differences were found in rates of excellent response and barriers to treatment. Continued studies with larger samples incorporating noninferiority designs are needed to examine issues of comparability between treatments. Second, the comparison to standard clinic-based PCIT offered a conservative I-PCIT evaluation, benchmarking it against the same treatment delivered in person, but this comparison also required participants to live close enough to one of the two recruitment sites so they could feasibly participate in either of the treatment conditions as assigned. Accordingly, although I-PCIT itself was an entirely remote format, the present findings may not generalize to the more geographically remote and underserved populations for whom VTC formats may be particularly necessary (see Chou, Bry, & Comer, 2017). Research comparing I-PCIT to usual care in rural populations is needed, given that technology access may differ across regions. Third, we provided equipment kits to I-PCIT families so differences in treatment response could not be attributed to differences in household technology. Although many families already own sufficient equipment for I-PCIT, some participants who benefited from I-PCIT may not have independently owned proper equipment to participate in I-PCIT outside of this study. Fourth, we presently focused on the main outcomes of I-PCIT; examination of other outcomes and mediators, such as parent stress, parent–child interactions, and parenting practices, was beyond the scope of this analysis. Fifth, inclusion criteria focused on parent reports and IE assessments, and did not directly incorporate teacher/daycare-provider reports. Although the K-DBDS (Keenan et al., 2001) assesses symptoms across multiple settings, incorporating direct teacher/daycare-provider assessments might have yielded a more representative sample of DBD youth. Finally, families lacking Internet accessibility will not be able to benefit from I-PCIT. Almost half of participating families reported annual incomes over $100,000. Encouragingly, the overwhelming majority of U.S. families now have Internet access, and digital divides based on income, race, and age are steadily disappearing (Pew Research Center, 2015).
Despite limitations, this study offers the first controlled evaluation of VTC to offer fully remote behavioral parent training to the home setting with a live therapist, and provides support for the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of I-PCIT. Although behavioral parent-training programs are well-supported and recommended as first-line treatment for early onset DBDs, problems remain in the accessibility of quality care. Against a concerning backdrop of reduced availability of and reliance on psychosocial treatments in preschool-aged youth and increased pharmacological intervention for DBDs in the absence of relevant controlled evaluations (Comer et al., 2010; Olfson et al., 2010), the present findings underscore the urgency to overcome reimbursement challenges to telemental health and improve dissemination of technology-based care that can transform the reach of indicated care."
}